CONCEPTUALISING THE INTERFACE
BETWEEN ENGLISH FURTHER AND HIGHER
EDUCATION
Volume One

William Gourley
A thesis submitted in fulfillment of the requirements for
the award of the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
Department of Educational Studies
October 2009
ABSTRACT
The thesis is a theory-led conceptual account of organisational change at the
interface of further and higher education in England over the period 1988 to
2008. It is focused on colleges in the further education sector that provide
courses of higher education overseen by a separate higher education sector.
The study is concerned with the role and function of boundary organisations
and the nature of the exchanges and boundary work that take place between
the two sectors. It draws upon theories from political science, economic
sociology and the work of anthropologist Mary Douglas to analyse these
cross-sector transactions. In part one of the thesis, the context for the
research is outlined and the rationale for a conceptual approach is explained.
In part two, an analytical framework is developed to conceptualise the
dynamics of boundary provision together with processes of hybridisation. In
part three, an assessment is made of the contribution of theory to an
understanding of policy and institutional change, including the goal of
widening participation.
Dedication
For Stephanie and Neil. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Professor Gareth Parry whose comments and help
have always been helpful and appreciated. I would like to also
acknowledge the help of Doctor William Richardson whose help early on
in the thesis made me focus on getting it right. Finally I would like to thank
my wife Katherine for putting up with me and my professional and
academic commitments. Only she knows how much work has gone into
this. 
ABREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ALI Adult Learning Inspectorate
ANT Actor Network Theory
CNNA Council for National Academic Awards
DFCS Department for Children and Schools
DIUS Department for Industry University and Sciences
FE Further Education
FEC Further Education College
FEFC Further Education Funding Council
HE Higher Education
HEFCE Higher Education Council for England
HEQC Higher Education Quality Council
IQER Internal Quality Enhancement Review
LEA Local Education Authority
LLN Lifelong Learning Networks
LSC Learning Skills Council
MEG Mixed Economy Group
NPM New Public Management
OFFA Office for Fair Access
OFSTED Office for Standards in Education, Children' s Services and Skills
PCFC Polytechnic and Colleges Funding Council
QAA Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART ONE
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION p1
The Field of Inquiry ……………………………………………….. p 2
Positioning the Research: The Research
Questions………………………………………............................ p 7
The Structure of the Thesis ……………………………………… p 10
Positioning the Researcher ……………………………………… p 12
CHAPTER TWO: CONTEXTUALISING
THE ENGLISH FURTHER-HIGHER INTERFACE p 15
Positioning the Further-Higher education Interface …………… p 18
Configuring and Re-configuring the Further-Higher
Education Interface: 1988 to 2008 ……………………………… p 24
1988 -1992 …………………………………. p 25
1993-1996 …………………………………. p 27
1997-2000 …………………………………. p 30
2001-2008 …………………………………. p 31
Trends and Trajectories in the Changing
Further-Higher Education Landscape…………………………..... p 33
CHAPTER THREE:LITERATURE REVIEW p 41
An Overview of the Further-Higher Education ‘Field’ ……… p 44
The Policy Context ……………………………………………. p 45
The Practitioner and ‘Grey Literature’ Literature …………... p 52
The Academic Literature: Synthesis and Analysis ………… p 54
Boundaries and Boundary Work ……………………………. p 64
Re-visiting the Further-Higher Education ‘Field’ …………… p 71
CHAPTER FOUR: A THEORETICAL CASE STUDY p75
Defining the Case ……………………………………………. p 82
The Analytical Framework …………………………………… p 89
The Research Questions …………………………………… p 91
The Case Study Method: a Critique ………………………. p 94
Conclusion p102
PART TWO
CHAPTER FIVE: A POLITICAL ECONOMY OF
FURTHER-HIGHER EDUCATION p104
An Instituted Process ..................................................................... p109
New and Old Institutionalisms ....................................................... p119
Why Institutions Matter .................................................................. p123
Rational Choice Institutionalism ................................................. p126
Historical Institutionalism ............................................................ p134
Neo-Institutionalism and Sociological Institutionalism ............... p135
Fields, Fissions and Fractures .............................................. p136
Institutional Environment and Institutional Arrangements .......... p139
Classifying the Interface ............................................................. p141
Boundary Work: Contexts and Processes .................................... p144
CHAPTER SIX: CLASSIFYING THE INTERFACE p150
The Ecology of Further-Higher
Education................................................................................... p152
Institutional Duality .................................................................... p153
The Grid-Group Heuristic .......................................................... p154
Trajectories of Change ............................................................... p160
Structuration and Fields ............................................................. p161
Boundaries and Transgressions ................................................. p167
CHAPTER SEVEN: CONFIGURING EXCHANGES
IN FURTHER-HIGHER EDUCATION p188
Cases and Transactions ……………………………………………. p191
The Further-Higher Education Interface ...................................... p192
Transactions as Instituted Processes ……………………….......... p193
A Conceptual Framework ............................................................ p194
Transaction Cost Economics ....................................................... p198
Asset Specificity as
Hybridisation…….......................................................................... p200
Uncertainty .................................................................................. p205
Frequency ................................................................................... p207
Small Numbers Bargaining ........................................................ p208
Behavioural Assumptions: Shaping Organisational Preferences … p209
Principal Agent Theory ............................................................... p210
Emergent Organisational Forms .................................................. p213
Hybrid Organisational Forms: Franchising ................................. p215
Conceptualising the Further-Higher Education Interface............ p220
CHAPTER EIGHT: BOUNDARY WORK IN p225
FURTHER-HIGHER EDUCATION
Boundary Work ............................................................................ p226
Boundary Institutions ................................................................... p229
Boundary Organisations ............................................................... p230
Boundary Objects ......................................................................... p233
Connecting Boundaries ................................................................ p237
‘Clumsy Institutions’ and Hybridity’ ........................................... p238
‘Wicked Problems’ and Boundary Institutions …………………….. p241
Boundary Properties ..................................................................... p243
Boundary Crossing ...................................................................... p243
Boundary Work and Organisational fields .................................. p251
PART THREE
CHAPTER NINE: NEW PUBLIC MANAGEMENT p257
A Neo Liberal Hegemony? ................................................................ p263
‘Wicked Problems’ and New Public Management ....................... p265
Reforming Public Sector Higher Education................................... p267
Marketisation and ‘Low Policy’ ....................................................... p269
From ‘Low’ to ‘High Policy’ Legacies of institutional Duality........... p281
Hybrids and Hybridisation ............................................................. p283
CHAPTER NINE: ‘LOW POLICY’ p291
Bricolage at Work: the ‘Franchise Experiment’ ............................ p293
Assets Specificity and the ‘Franchise Experiment’ ........................ p308
The ‘Franchise Experiment’ as a Discovery Process ...................... p309
Private Business Format Franchising: Lessons for
Further-Higher Education …………………………............................ p313
Boundary Work, Boundary Organisations and Boundary Objects .. p316
‘Low Policy’ and the Evidence Base .............................................. p317
CHAPTER ELEVEN: ‘HIGH POLICY’ p322
Illustrating ‘High Policy’ ............................................................. p333
Reconfiguring the Interface: ‘High Policy’ ................................. p335
The Grid-Group Heuristic and ‘High Policy’.............................. p343
‘Shifts in Asset Specificity and High Policy’ ............................... p345
Institutionalising Boundary Work ................................................ p349
CHAPTER TWELVE: CONCLUSION p359
The Research Questions ………………………………………… p363
Future Work ………………………………………………………. p372
BIBLIOGRAPHY p375
TABLES
Table 5.0 .......................................................................... p115
Table 5.1 p140
Table 6.0 .......................................................................... p159
Table 6.1 ........................................................................... p179
Table 6.2 ........................................................................... p186
Table 7.0 ............................................................................ p201
Table 10 1 …………………………………………………….. p315
Table 10.2 …………………………………………………….. p316
Table 11.0 ......................................................................... p332
Table 11.1 ......................................................................... p340
Table 11.2 p342
Table 11.3 ........................................................................ p348
Table 11.4 ........................................................................ p352
Table 11.5 ........................................................................ p354
PART ONE 
1
CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
This thesis is a theoretically-led conceptual investigation of institutional and
organisational change that has taken place over a twenty year period in the
delivery of higher education (HE) in the further education (FE) sector of English
post-compulsory education. It addresses a gap in research into the evolving
relationship between the FE and HE sectors which it will be argued lacks a
substantive theoretically informed body of research to complement policy-based
empirical work. The thesis synthesises a range of hitherto separate disciplinary
traditions to construct a conceptual and analytical framework for understanding
emerging hybrid forms of further-higher education organisational forms and the
institutional and organisational changes in the delivery of non university based
forms of HE.
The term further-higher education is used consistently throughout the thesis to
designate a form of post-compulsory educational provision that is neither FE nor
HE. It indicates a mode of delivery that is a hybrid, consisting of elements and
permutations of both FE and HE in varying combinations and mixes within
emerging further-higher organisational forms. 
2
The chapter first sets out the field of inquiry and delimits the context and landscape
of English further-higher education with specific reference to the twenty year period
covering 1988 until 2008. Secondly, the research approach and disciplinary
traditions that are synthesised and used to theorise further-higher education are
introduced and the key research questions identified. Thirdly the structure of the
overall thesis is outlined. Finally, the researcher’s own position in the research
process is described.
The Field of Inquiry
The field of inquiry investigated in this thesis is the delivery of further-higher
education at the interface of the English FE and HE sectors considered over a
period of two decades. The boundary work undertaken at the interface and the role
and function of various boundary organisations that mediate exchanges across the
further-higher interface is contextualised as part of a wider system.
The thesis explores the changing roles and functions of further-higher education
chronologically, theoretically and conceptually. This twenty year period was one of
rapid institutional and organisational change. The aim of the thesis is to
understand these transitions and changes as a key aspect of a wider political
economy that situates further-higher education in a broader conceptual and
analytical framework. This framework is then used to develop a model and
contextualise the exchanges that take place across the interface and the
reproduction of economic, social, cultural and symbolic capital that cross the
interface. 
3
Further-higher education is distinctive in a number of ways. Located in one sector
but overseen by another and more powerful HE sector it occupies the interstices of
two separate systems with distinct histories, roles and identities. At the same time
and despite these different histories there is an integral link between the FE and
HE sectors which is part of a broader political economy of post-compulsory
education.
The organisational forms that deliver further-higher education are also distinctive.
They are organisational and institutional hybrids that are located between market
and hierarchy. At different stages of the development of further-higher education
the balance of competition to collaboration between providers has shifted. As a
field of inquiry and over the twenty year period that this thesis is concerned with
the further-higher interface has been configured and reconfigured in different ways.
Four major ‘institutional turns’ are identified as significant transitions that led to a
fundamental reconfiguration of the further-higher interface. These four transition
points fundamentally reshaped and reconfigured the interface resulting in it being
redefined, reconfigured and reclassified.
The first of these transitions covered the period between 1988 and up until 1992;
the second lasted between 1993 and 1996; the third was from 1997 to 2000; and
the last phase covered the period from 2001 until 2008. A preliminary sketch of
these four institutional turns reveals that between 1988 and 1992 the municipal or
public sector of HE, the polytechnics and the FEC both under local education 
4
authority control at the time, were radically reconfigured and their status redefined
through incorporation.
From 1993 until 1996 former municipal HE was delivered through self-governing
corporations independent of local authority control. The abolition of the binary
divide between the polytechnics and universities following the 1992 Further and
Higher Education Act entitled the polytechnics and some other higher education
providers to acquire the university title and gave them powers to award their own
degrees. These were years of market-led provision with further-higher education
increasingly although not exclusively delivered through ‘franchising’ of an HE
qualification. The post-1992 ‘new universities’ or old polytechnics tended to
dominate these collaborative arrangements.
The next set of significant changes were signalled by the publication of the Dearing
Committee’s report (NCIHE, 1997) on the future size, shape and scope of HE. The
report recommended that the non university sector of HE delivered in FE should
play a more prominent role in future provision of HE and complement the existing
forms of provision delivered by the pre-1992 and post-1992 universities.
After Dearing, there was a raising of the profile and importance of further-higher
education as it increasingly came to play a more prominent, if slow growing, part in
delivering HE, and funding and quality assurance arrangements were reconfigured
to reflect this. 
5
From 2001 the introduction of foundation degrees (short-cycle, employer-led
vocational HE) strengthened the role of FECs delivering HE. This was
accompanied by a move towards more structured collaborative arrangements in
contrast to the market-led phases that had preceded these changes that now
encouraged coordination across the separate sectors.
For at least half of the twenty-year time period that is the subject of this thesis FE
and HE had remained subject to formally separate planning, funding and quality
assurance regulations. Further-higher education had been a somewhat anomalous
development, an example of ‘matter out of place’ and without a clear remit from
policy makers in either FE or HE. This marginal status meant strategic planning
across the sector interfaces was limited. The different cultures, traditions, practices
and systems found at the further-higher education interface complicated these
existing divisions.
The main task of the research is how to conceptualise and theorise how these
different regulatory frameworks and the permutations and configurations of
funding, planning and quality assurance overseeing further-higher education. How
have arrangements been configured and reconfigured over time? And to what
extent are the changes transitional or permanent features of an emerging furtherhigher
education landscape?
Navigating the turbulent and constant institutional and organisational change that
has been a feature of further-higher education is inevitably a complex process to
manage. Moreover, as HE in general has become more diverse and fragmented 
6
with the massification of HE, further-higher education provision has accentuated
this complexity and problems of coordination have become more acute as sector
boundaries have blurred. The diversity of organisational forms that can be found in
further-higher education thus creates further problems in coordinating and
communicating across diverse organisational interests and sector boundaries.
The transition to a mass system of HE, defined as an increase to between 15%
and 50% of the relevant cohort of students entering HE (Trow,1973), had taken
place rapidly, in particular in the polytechnics from the late 1980s and early 1990s.
The role and function of the non-university sector of HE in this wider expansion of
HE provision is less well known but is explored conceptually in the thesis. Its
contribution to widening participation and access of non-traditional students to HE
is later analysed in terms of a broader political economy. Essential to this approach
is recognition that the non-university sector of HE provision is an integral subcomponent
of the field of inquiry that explores the more extensive university based
HE provision
This study is limited to English further-higher education and is bounded by time,
location and sector. Nevertheless, this provision has to be understood in terms of
broader macro processes including the marketisation and massification of HE that
were accelerating from the mid-1980s onwards and as part of a wider ideological
shift in the delivery of public sector provision. Linked to these shifts was an
emphasis on introducing private sector practices, management techniques and
competitive mechanisms into the public sector. Further-higher education would not
be immune from these broader trends. 
7
Positioning the Research: The Research Questions
The thesis is essentially a conceptual and hence theory-led piece of research. The
analytical framework and conceptual toolkit that is developed to explore the furtherhigher
interface is drawn from different disciplinary traditions. These are
synthesised into a set of concepts and an analytical toolkit that combine
institutionalist readings of organisational change in further-higher education with
contributions from studies of boundaries and boundary work from different sources.
They are incorporated into an overarching framework that permit and promote
analysis of the further-higher interface as part of a wider political economy. The
contributions are used to address the institutional duality of further-higher
education and the problems created for the hybrid provision that has emerged at
the interface. As a mode of provision delivered in one sector but overseen and
accountable through another further-higher education has become a diverse and
fragmented field of inquiry.
A number of research questions were derived from a preliminary reading of these
literatures and disciplinary traditions. From a neo-institutionalist and sociological
reading of organisational theory the question of how institutional and organisational
transitions in further-higher education have evolved was conceptualised and
theorised. From economic sociology the embeddedness of economic action in
wider institutional, social and socio-political contexts has been considered.
Contributions from the sociological study of science and technology and actor
network theory (ANT) have been applied to understanding the role and function of
boundary organisations and boundary work in collaborating across inter-sector 
8
boundaries. In combination these literatures were synthesised into an interdisciplinary
analytical model that is used to conceptualise the processes of
hybridisation at the further-higher interface. These research questions were
modified and refined as the thesis progressed.
The key questions posed by the research address the configuration and
reconfiguration of the interface and how this can be understood conceptually and
theoretically. The research questions are:
* How can English HE delivered in FECs be conceptualised as
a sub-component of a wider system of mass HE?
* To what extent has the reconfiguration of the further-higher
interface over the last twenty years resulted in the
institutionalisation of new ‘rules of the game’, the persistence
of institutional duality and parallel systems of regulation?
* How can the boundary work that takes place at the furtherhigher
interface and the changing roles and functions of
boundary organisations that sit at the interface be
conceptualised and contextualised?
* Are the institutional and organisational changes that are and
have taken place at the interface over the last twenty years
permanent or transitory?
* Does increasing diversity of HE provision enhance widening
participation or re-inforce structured social inequalities through
the function of non-university based provision as an alternative
mode of delivery? 
9
* How can the historical shifts in terminological conventions,
systems of classification and data gathering techniques in
further-higher education be conceptualised and integrated into
one analytical framework?
The relationship of FE to HE in further-higher education delivery therefore
constitutes a dilemma for policy makers given that the goal of expanding and
widening participation to HE coexists with the increasing differentiation and
fragmentation of organisational forms that do not have equal access to resources,
status and influence. Conceptualising the exchanges that take place across the
interface also needs to incorporate some of the tensions and paradoxes that are a
result of this complexity and the institutional duality of further-higher education.
The research questions set out above are designed to illuminate and explore some
of these tensions and paradoxes, especially the dynamics of boundary work at the
further-higher interface. How can boundary work and the boundary organisations
that mediate the two sectors be conceptualised and how can the hybrid
organisational forms found in further-higher education be classified?
The thesis sets out to explore these tensions against a broader political economy,
through drawing on a set of conceptual tools and constructing an analytical
framework that emphasises the contested nature of the further-higher interface. It
also builds on an approach that is relational, holistic and contextual emphasising
that the interface cannot be understood in isolation or as a simple dichotomy. 
10
The Structure of the Thesis
The thesis is structured in three parts. Part One provides the context for
understanding developments in further-higher education, reviewing the relevant
literature and providing a rationale for the research approach adopted. Part Two
develops the analytical framework used to conceptualise further-higher education
and constitutes the main body of the research. Part Three examines policy
developments in further-higher education and examines the significance of theory
for illustrating policy.
The chapters contained in Part One set the scene for the development of a
theoretical account of the evolution of further-higher education with chapter Two
following this introduction providing an outline of the context of change at the
interface outlining the institutional and organisational landscape of further-higher
education provision from 1988 until 2008. Chapter Three reviews the literature and
research and highlights future areas for investigation. Chapter Four outlines the
case study methodology adopted in the thesis and explores the appropriateness of
a theoretical case study for developing conceptual understanding in this undertheorised
area.
Part Two constitutes the theoretical core of the thesis. Chapter Five provides a
broad account of the political economy of further-higher education and synthesises
the various literatures and research traditions that will be drawn upon. Chapters
Six, Seven and Eight develop the analytical framework used to conceptualise the
dynamics and significance of further-higher provision as a sub-component of the 
11
wider provision of HE. Chapter Six investigates how further-higher education is
classified and how shifts in classification can be understood conceptually and
analytically. Chapter Seven explores the exchanges that take place at the furtherhigher
interface and the asymmetrical nature of these exchanges through an
examination of the contribution of a modified version of new institutional economics
for understanding the dynamics of boundary work in further-higher interface.
Chapter Eight investigates the process of hybridisation in further-higher education
and the boundary work of boundary organisations in producing boundary objects
and their role and function in coordinating inter-organisational collaboration.
Part Three applies the conceptual vocabulary and analytical framework developed
in Part Two to understanding the development of the interface and illustrates its
use with examples of policy formation and intervention in chapters Nine, Ten and
Eleven. Chapter Nine explores the impact of the introduction of private sector
business practices and management in FE and HE and its impact at the furtherhigher
education. Chapter Ten explores the period following incorporation of the
polytechnics in 1988 until the Dearing Report of 1997. Chapter Eleven then tracks
the changes that followed Dearing as further-higher education evolved as a distinct
form of non university HE provision. The final chapter concludes the analysis and
makes recommendations for future research.
Positioning the Researcher
The idea for a conceptual and theory-based thesis emerged some ten years earlier
when the author completed a research Masters degree at the University of 
12
Sheffield. This inquiry was based upon a case study of the further-higher education
college at which he was employed (Gourley, 1997). As part of that process a
preliminary theoretical exploration of ‘franchising’ in further-higher education and
other inter-organisational forms of collaboration that were neither fully marketbased
nor based on hierarchy was undertaken. An understanding of the boundary
work, boundary management and boundary spanning that were intrinsic to
conceptualising and understanding in further-higher education was necessary,
Furthermore, an understanding of how to conceptualise the alignment of the
incentives, preferences and reward structures across sector divides was important.
The institutional environment and institutional arrangements in which the case
study organisation, a large mixed economy further-higher education provider, was
positioned was characterised by a state of institutional duality. Situated in one
sector of FE but subject to the regulation by and accountability to another based in
HE created problems for the coordination of plural forms of organisation that cross
the sector divides.
Given the empirical focus of the Masters degree, there was a need to investigate
the conceptual and theoretical foundations of inter-organisational collaboration.
Indeed it highlighted the paucity of theoretically and conceptually informed studies
in this area, especially those dealing with the structure, dynamics and processes of
boundary work and boundary management in further-higher education
partnerships. In particular, the institutional duality of further-higher education,
subject as it was to separate funding, planning and quality assurance bodies, was
generating new and diverse hybrid organisational forms at the further-higher
interface. This led to an interest in exploring the dynamics of the further-higher 
13
education interface that would lead to a theory-led approach to understanding how
the further-higher education interface could be conceptualised.
As government policy shifted from limited policy interest in this type of provision
prior to the Dearing Report of 1997 to an emphasis on structured collaboration it
seemed to the author that there was an important need to contribute a theoretical
framework to underpin more conceptually informed research. As a result, the
thesis increasingly became a theoretical investigation of the transactions and
exchanges that were taking place across the English further-higher interface. The
exploration of how further-higher education was classified and categorised,
configured and reconfigured over a twenty year time frame was to emerge as a
major line of inquiry.
At an advanced stage of the research an opportunity arose to participate in the
ESRC funded project ‘Universal Access and Dual Regimes of Further and Higher
Education’ based at the University of Sheffield (2006-2008). The author joined the
inquiry team as a linked research student but not as part of the main project. Two
working papers were produced by the author at this time and presented to the
project team (Gourley, 2007, 2008). The author attended regular team meetings
and contributed theoretical inputs that emphasised macro and meso levels of
analysis that complemented the largely meso and micro analysis adopted by the
project team. A number of synergies resulted and a cross-fertilisation of ideas
emerged. 
14
The thesis is therefore the result of a number of influences, beginning with a case
study of a further-higher education provider, moving to a theoretical and
conceptual analysis of English further-higher education from 1988 to 2008, and
finally to a synthesis of a range of disciplinary traditions to construct an analytical
framework designed to help understand institutional and organisational change in
further-higher education. 
15
CHAPTER TWO
CONTEXTUALISING THE ENGLISH FURTHER-HIGHER
EDUCATION INTERFACE
This chapter sets the scene for contextualising the shifting relationship between
the English FE and HE sectors that collaboratively deliver further-higher
education in the non-university sector of post-compulsory education. It covers a
period of rapid and almost constant change from 1988 to 2008. During that
period the profile and importance of further-higher education has increased
considerably as it has moved from the margins of policy to a more central role as
a component of a much larger university based sector of HE.
The FECs that deliver further-higher education in the non-university sector have
their origins in a separate sector from the university based providers. This
chapter briefly sketches these separate histories and trajectories. It
contextualises them providing a starting point for understanding the evolution of
contemporary further-higher education and the complexities and dynamics of the
FE and HE sector interface.
For the most of the period covered, non-university based HE delivered in furtherhigher
education was a poorly understood area. Indeed initially neither the FE nor 
16
the HE sectors saw further-higher education as their main area of responsibility.
It sat at the interstices of the two sectors, a somewhat anomalous mode of
provision that was yet to establish its credentials as an integral component of HE.
In the language of the social anthropologist Mary Douglas (1966) further-higher
education represented an example of ‘matter out of place’ being neither FE nor
HE but a hybrid of the two.
The shifting configurations of the further-higher interface constituted an integral if
subordinate component of a larger sector of English university based system of
HE. It neither had the same level of access to resources and funding, nor the
same status of more established traditional HE. Nevertheless, further-higher
education still comprised between 9% and 11% of HE delivered in England over
the decade proceeding 2008 (HEFCE, 2009).
The boundaries and interface of the two sectors would be configured and
reconfigured several times in the next twenty years. The definition and
classification of what constitutes the FE and HE sectors and by inference furtherhigher
education also changed over this time frame. Moreover, the governance
structures through which the two sectors were co-ordinated had evolved through
a balance of market led and state steered configurations that at times co-existed
in an uneasy tension. A shift from the market led approach that preceded the
Dearing report of 1997 would gradually give way to a more structured and
strategic set of mechanisms for coordinating the further-higher education
interface. 
17
The parallel systems of funding, planning and quality assurance that operated in
further-higher education and the governance structures for FE and HE were
largely insulated from each other. This was especially the case after 1992 and
the passing of the Further Higher Education Act of that year. This act established
two distinct sectors of FE and HE regulated by separate funding and quality
assurance systems. It also formally defined two distinct sectors of FE and HE
establishing parallel systems. In the case of further-higher education these
governance structures were problematic because neither had a remit specifically
to deal with further-higher education other than as a residual responsibility to its
core work.
Further-higher provision sits between the FE and HE sectors occupying the gaps
between these two systems of regulation each evolving from different historical
roots. One, with its roots in the FE sector and the municipal or public sector of FE
once overseen by LEAs, was regulated by the Further and Education Funding
Council (FEFC) post 1992. The other with its roots in a university based HE
sector was overseen by the Higher Education Funding Council for England
(HEFCE). Neither the FE nor HE sector bodies set up by the Further and Higher
Education Act of 1992 had a clear responsibility for overseeing this interface. The
following section sketches the influences of the legacies of these two systems
and how they impacted on the evolution of further-higher provision.
Firstly, the shifting definition of what constituted FE and HE and the emerging
conventions for classifying further-higher education are considered and placed in
the historical context of the past and present roles and functions of FECs. 
18
Secondly, the institutional arrangements that configured the funding, planning
and quality assurance of further-higher education and its regulatory framework is
outlined. Thirdly, exchanges that take place across sectors and the
organisational boundaries of the further-higher education interface are
contextualised. The configuration and reconfiguration of the further-higher
interface is explored as a process that is set against this background. These
transitions are bounded historically, geographically and temporally. This chapter
provides the context for understanding how provision that evolved in one sector
of FE was regulated and overseen by another sector of HE.
Positioning the Further-Higher Education Interface
The contemporary English learning and skills sector consisted of some 387
colleges funded by the Learning and Skills Council (LSC) in 2006/7 with a diverse
range of providers that varied in size and structure. Of these, 262 were general
FECs, 23 were specialist colleges and 102 were sixth form colleges (HEFCE,
2009). The sector was essentially characterised by diversity, complexity and
fragmentation that defied easy categorisation. The further-higher education that
was delivered in FECs was equally as diverse.
FECs have traditionally always been close to the world of work and have been
local in their focus and orientation with strong links with employers. Historically,
the roots of FE lie in the Victorian mechanics institutes that emerged in England
and Scotland in the 19th century as a response to growing industrialisation
creating a demand for skilled workers and technicians to fuel the industrial 
19
revolution. These were not initiatives that were sponsored by the state but were
based on voluntary and local initiatives that reflected the configuration of local
labour markets and demands. This local and vocational feature of FE has
remained prominent.
After the Second World War, FECs came under local authority control via the
Education Act of 1944. The act to some extent consolidated the largely ad hoc
nature of FECs historical development up until then. Nevertheless FECs still
remained predominantly local types of provision that reflected a wide range of
different types of provision, funding levels and local demands. There was no
central coordinating body overseeing provision such as that which would be
established following the Further and Higher Education Act of 1992 when FECs
were finally incorporated and removed from local authority control. The system
that was established in 1944 would remain largely in place up until the late 1980s
and early 1990s when the FE sector was radically reconfigured.
General FECs and tertiary colleges deliver mainly vocational FE to young people
and adults with much of it part-time. This vocational provision has gradually over
time been supplemented by academic qualifications such as GCSE and A levels
especially from 1960 onwards. FECs had by then began to develop a role as a
second chance provider for many students who had not succeeded in the
compulsory education system or who had delayed their entry into education for a
range of reasons. In addition, a range of sixth form colleges also provide mainly
academic courses. In the 1980s FECs branched out into delivering courses such
as the Youth Training Scheme as the youth unemployment situation created an 
20
urgent demand to re-skill the workforce and cope with rising unemployment. This
link between economic imperatives and the FE sector as an engine of economic
rejuvenation has been a persistent theme ever since. Today FECs are
responsible for their funding and infrastructure to the LSC which was established
in 2001 and also has responsibilities for work based learning and an extended FE
sector.
Many FECs have a long history of providing HE, too, especially in more specialist
and vocational areas. Prior to 1988 this was conventionally referred to as
advanced FE with FE designated non advanced FE. But this HE provision was
overshadowed by the contribution of the polytechnics from the late 1960s
onwards. Today many FECs also provide HE provision albeit as a minority of
their provision in comparison to the bulk of their FE work. It is this HE provision
delivered in the non-university sector that is designated further-higher education.
In terms of scale and scope it ranges from a substantial proportion of the postcompulsory
education delivered in FECs found in the so called 29 or so mixed
economy group colleges (MEG) who deliver significant amounts of HE to the 200
or so general FECs that deliver small pockets. These MEG providers deliver the
bulk of further-higher education. There are also a smaller number of specialist
providers such as agricultural colleges that also provide some HE.
Further-higher education providers receive funds from the HEFCE through three
main routes: they are via direct, indirect and consortium based funding streams.
The diversity of funding streams and the wide range of types of further-higher 
21
provider in terms of scale and FE and HE mix has created a complex system in
terms of its governance.
The HE funded by the HEFCE was designated ‘prescribed’ HE. This term had
come into general use following the 1988 Education Reform Act. This distinction
was re-inforced by further legislation in 1989 and then by the Further Higher
Education Act of 1992 which formally established two separate FE and HE
sectors.
Another mode of provision categorised as ‘non-prescribed’ HE is today funded by
the LSC on a discretionary basis. Initially this funding passed from the local
authorities in 1992 when FECs were incorporated and the FEFC established.
These tend to consist of a range of professional courses, for example teacher
training. The reasons for the distinction are historical. The 1988 act began a
process of distinguishing between FE and HE as two distinct and formally
differentiated sectors.
Thus from 1993 prescribed HE was funded by the HEFCE; non-prescribed HE
remained with the FEFC who funded FE. In 1999 some non-prescribed HE
(mainly the HNC’s) was transferred to the HEFCE. Non-prescribed HE that
remained funded by the FEFC was transferred to the LSC when it was created in
2001.
‘Franchising’, whereby delivery of HE was subcontracted to an FEC by an HE
provider for a fee, was the predominant mechanism through which funding was 
22
allocated indirectly. The HE provider remained responsibly for the quality of
provision under this organisational form.
Contemporary further-higher education providers are quality assured for their
prescribed HE provision by the Quality Assurance Agency (QAA). Nonprescribed
HE delivered in FECs is quality assured by the Office for Standards in
Education (OFSTED) which is responsible for overseeing the learning and skills
sector of post-compulsory education. A smaller number of university sector
based HE providers offer work funded by the LSC. In some cases a mix of further
and higher education is delivered in what are becoming known as dual sector
higher education establishments (for example Thames Valley University is a
large mixed provider that delivers both FE and HE). A small number of university
based HE providers deliver FE funded by the LSC.
This duality of funding, quality and planning streams has been a persistent
feature of the further-higher landscape over the twenty years or so covered in this
thesis. This has produced a number of contradictions, paradoxes and tensions at
the further-higher interface. Anomalies in the classification of HE such as the
distinction between prescribed and non-prescribed HE remain to this day (Clark,
2002). Nor has the existing statistical data on FE and HE always been easily
comparable.
It is only relatively recently that attempts have been made to modify these initially
distinct quality assurance systems to recognise the distinctiveness of furtherhigher
providers operating at the interstices of two sectors. For example, the 
23
QAA was created in 1997 and given a remit to quality assure all prescribed HE
irrespective of where it was delivered. The transfer of responsibilities for quality
assuring provision previously overseen by the FEFC, for example HNCs, to the
QAA after 1999 increased the level of complexity of the system it was
responsible for.
Further-higher education began to play a more prominent role in policy-making
for HE following the Dearing Report of 1997. This recommended an expansion of
sub degree level or short cycle educational qualification with a special role for
further-higher education in providing it. The Labour government that was elected
in 1997 accepted most of Dearing’s recommendations. The report marked a
significant increase in the profile of further-higher education in the context of a
widening participation to HE and particularly in terms of its role in delivering subdegree
level HE or short cycle qualifications.
The separate FE and HE sectors established by the Further and Higher
Education Act of 1992 are explored here for their contemporary relevance for
understanding how the system for regulating the further-higher interface has
evolved and changed. The 1992 act effectively codified and classified the
distinction between FE and HE in legislation. However, for further-higher
education there was no such clarity and it remained a somewhat interstitial form
of HE provision that sat between two fundamentally different systems of
regulation. The legacy of the 1992 legislation was that there were two sectors
neither of which came under an overarching or single strategic planning
framework. 
24

With the exception of a minority of non-prescribed HE that is still funded by the
LSC and quality assured by FE bodies such as OFSTED further-higher education
is largely regulated by HE bodies. HE bodies have also been more prominent in
policy formation for further-higher education in the past in comparison to those for
FE. The evolution and implication of these dual arrangements for the emergence
of the contemporary further-higher interface has been profound.
Thus different regulatory frameworks have co-existed at different stages of this
evolution of further-higher education over the twenty year period covered here.
These are explored as a set of institutional transitions that are illustrated at
significant turning points in the evolution of further-higher education after 1988.
Configuring and Re-configuring the Further-Higher Education Interface:
1988 to 2008
Three major pieces of legislation and one highly influential report mark significant
transitions in how the further-higher education interface was configured. The first
was the Education Reform Act of 1988 (ERA) that set the polytechnics free of
local education authority control. The second was the Further and Higher
Education Reform Act of 1992 that continued the process with the incorporation
of FECs and the abolition of the binary divide between polytechnics and
chartered universities. The third, the Dearing Report of 1997 made
recommendations for the shape of HE for the next twenty years and resulted in
the government adopting most its recommendations. These were accepted in
principle but then taken in different directions by the new Labour government 
25
elected in 1997. The fourth and final transition was implemented through another
act in 2000 which established the Learning and Skills Council confirming a sector
divide between FE and HE. These phases of institutional and organisational
transformation are explored throughout the thesis conceptually and analytically.
The following section sets the context in which these reforms took place.
1988 to 1992
The incorporation of the polytechnics in 1988 and of FECs in 1992 transferred
the assets, finances, staffing and planning responsibilities of the LEAs to newly
created independent corporations that were to operate as legally autonomous
bodies. The governing bodies of these corporations were to be reconstituted with
greater influence for business interests and competition was to be encouraged
between the corporations.
The first incorporations took place in the polytechnic sector. However, the binary
divide between the polytechnics and the traditional or chartered university sector
was to remain in place for some further five years and external bodies such as
the CNAA retained responsibilities for overseeing polytechnic awards during this
interim. The chartered universities sat outside of this system with the power to
award their own degrees.
Incorporation meant that FECs would be freed from LEA control and increasingly
subject to an emerging market led institutional environment that would be
overseen by the newly created FEFC established in 1993. Secondly, the 
26
functions of finance, human resources and other key functions previously
performed by the LEAs were now the responsibility of individual independent
corporations. Thirdly, the collaborative arrangements that had evolved under the
LEAs in the old public or municipal sector of non-university higher education
would increasingly be replaced by franchising arrangements between the
independent polytechnics and FECs that were largely unplanned and which
weakly regulated.
However, like the polytechnics FECs remained dependent on external bodies for
ratifying their awards until the abolition of the binary divide in 1992 gave the
polytechnics the power to award their own degrees. The significance of this latter
point is that both the polytechnics and FECs were familiar with the oversight of
external agencies that ratified their awards. Consequently, and because of this
past membership of a distinct public sector, the polytechnics and the FECs had
always had less autonomy than the chartered universities. They were therefore
and arguably more responsive to external pressures originating from central
government.
In effect, the period 1988 to 1992 prepared the way for the consolidation of what
would become a formal distinction between the FE and HE sectors. It also would
also eventually lead to the establishment of two separate funding and quality
bodies for FE and HE. The distinction between prescribed higher education that
was funded by the then Polytechnic Colleges Funding Council (PCFC) and nonprescribed
HE which remained with FE and the local authorities was to be later
reinforced in future legislation. The consequence was that non-prescribed HE 
27
remained and still remains somewhat of an anomaly in the system of classifying
HE.
There was also a gradual but fundamental ideological shift that would be put in
place that favoured the marketisation of FE and HE and the introduction of
private sector practices. These changes mirrored wider changes that were taking
place in the public sector outside of HE. In further-higher education they had
begun earlier but were established in embryonic form under ERA.
1993 to 1996
In 1993 the FE and HE sectors were formally reconfigured and reclassified with
the establishment of the FEFC to oversee the planning, funding and quality
assurance functions of the FE sector and the HEFCE (responsible for quality
assessment) and the Higher Education Quality Council (HEQC) (responsible for
quality enhancement) to oversee HE.
From their inception their roles and functions with respect to the further-higher
interface were unclear. Neither the newly created HE funding and quality bodies
nor the FE ones saw their prime role as being to deal with further-higher
education which was not considered to be their core business. Their main
concerns were on what they saw as their main priority, namely the regulation of
their own sectors. Nevertheless, the HEFCE and through it the HEQC and to a
lesser extent the FEFC did produce a number of relevant documents and reports
on the further-higher interface to extend what at the time was an extremely 
28
limited evidence base on the subject of what was in policy terms a largely
forgotten area (HEQC, 1995, HEFCE, 1996).
The main organisational form that operated during this phase of ‘low policy’
(Parry and Thompson, 2002) was loosely described as ‘franchising’ which
referred to the sub-contracting of some of an HE organisations qualifications for
delivery at the site of a further-higher education provider. Further-higher
education providers thus received indirect funding for their delivery through their
university based HE partner. The proportion of funding passed on by some HE
partners was a bone of contention for some FECs.
‘Franchising’ was associated with the spectacular expansion and shift to
marketisation in the late 1980s and into the 1990s. ‘Franchising’ as a term
commonly used at the time was used to refer to a range of different
organisational forms and arrangements in further-higher education. Consequently
as a terminology it did not always accurately reflect the diversity of these
arrangements. However, as a term its use was common and consequently it has
been retained as a descriptor.
Although the term was not always used accurately across the further-higher
interface it did in essence encapsulate a bilaterally dependent economic and
contractual arrangement between legally autonomous FE and HE providers that
was voluntary in scale and scope. As such, the growth of franchising was a
significant feature of the marketisation of HE and the transition to a more
diversified system. 
29
While the period 1988 until 1992 was one of transition the period from 1993 until
1996 was one of rapid initial growth in franchising (especially up to 1994 when
further growth was brought to a halt). Shortly following incorporation the HEFCE
published a review of further-higher education provision which emphasised its
continued focus on markets as a mechanism for its delivery (HEFCE, 1996).
However, a cap on HE numbers from 1994 followed this initial growth and
arrested this initial market led growth. This generated a degree of uncertainty and
short-termism among some further-higher education partners.
Thus the phase 1993 until 1996 was one in which marketisation and market
mechanisms were encouraged at the further-higher education interface but other
factors intervened in the operation of these mechanisms. Firstly while the FEFC
followed a policy of expanding FE after 1993 (albeit with a reduced resource
base) the HEFCE began by inheriting an expanding HE sector that had moved
from elite to a mass HE system.
This cap had repercussions for ‘franchising’ for further-higher education. Some
HE partners reigned in their franchising at short notice and long term planning
was difficult for further-higher providers given this uncertainty. Some HE
providers withdrew suddenly from ‘franchising’ following these developments
while others reconsidered their positions. This cap was substantially to remain in
place until after the Dearing Report recommended a resumption of growth of HE
numbers post 1997. 
30
1997 to 2000
The Dearing Report was published in 1997 and marks a symbolic transition from
the era of ‘low policy’ to a more interventionist one of ‘high policy’. This would
increasingly be based upon planned and structured collaboration across the
sector boundaries. And while not all of Dearing’s recommendations were adopted
those that were, including the abolition of student maintenance grants and the
introduction of tuition fees and student loans, were meant to facilitate an
expansion in student numbers in HE.
This phase between 1997 and 2000 was one of structural transformation during
which the responsibilities for funding all prescribed HE, including higher nationals
that had previously been funded as non-prescribed HE via the FEFC (other nonprescribed
HE remained with the FEFC), was placed in the hands of the HEFCE
in 1999. This not only increased the administrative load on the HEFCE but a thin
evidence base and a lack of familiarity with the operation of further-higher
education needed addressing. Another consequence was that overnight the
complexity and diversity of the HE system had increased and regulating this
diversity posed potential problems for how it would be regulated given the
increasing complexity of the task..
The establishment of the QAA shortly after Dearing reported took over many of
the functions of the HEFCE and the HEQC. One of the priorities of the QAA was
to address the matter of quality and standards of further-higher education. 
31
The different systems of quality assurance that had existed at the start of 1997,
with the FEFC adopting an interventionist and highly centralised inspection model
that most FECs were familiar with and from 1997, the QAA using a peer based
model of quality assurance (Underwood and Connell, 2000), meant there was
duplication and increased bureaucracy to deal with as well as new systems and
procedures to be established.
Other reforms such as the introduction of tuition fees and loans were potentially
able to fundamentally begin to reconfigure the demography of the student body in
radical ways. For further-higher education more radical changes were to take
place from 2001.
2001 until 2008
In 2001 the FEFC was abolished and the LSC established with extended
responsibilities for overseeing not only FECs but other providers of postcompulsory
education and training. Perhaps of greatest significance was the
announcement of a radical new qualification, a two-year short cycle HE
qualification the foundation degree, from 2001 that was designed to become the
main vocational qualification for further-higher education providers. The
foundation degree was to be a vehicle for establishing a distinct area of expertise
and type of HE that was employer focused and played to the existing vocational
strengths of FECs. It was also meant to be a route that would help facilitate an
expansion in the number of HE students and to help meet the newly announced 
32
government target of having 50% of 18 to 30 year olds participating in HE by
2010.
A more structured approach to delivering further-higher education approach was
now developing as the QAA extended its assessment to further-higher provision.
New bodies such as the lifelong learning networks (LLNs) were established with
the HEFCE having lead responsibility for these. Part of their remit was to facilitate
cross sector collaboration between the FE and HE sectors.
Collaborative links through initiatives such as Partners4Progression, Aim Higher
and the LLNs were encouraged to bridge the FE and HE divide and to facilitate
the growth of structured collaboration in further-higher education, progression
between FE and HE. Increasingly the LSC and HEFCE bodies were encouraged
to collaborate in widening participation to HE.
A white paper on HE published in 2003 reaffirmed the governments commitment
to structured collaboration and raising the profile of further-higher education. The
same white paper pointed out the additional burden on further-higher providers
and in particular of the MEGs in having to operate at sector interfaces and
respond to separate systems of funding and quality assurance (DfES, 2003).
Nevertheless the institutional duality of further-higher education was at least
recognised as burdensome and over bureaucratic.
The introduction of variable tuition fees from 2006 reinforced trends towards the
marketisation of HE. At the same time an emphasis on structured collaboration 
33
appeared to pull in a different direction. In 2004 the Office for Fair Access (OFFA)
was formed. This was meant to monitor whether tuition fees were adversely
affecting poorer students and to ensure bursaries were in place to mitigate the
workings of a pure market. Balancing collaboration and competition had been a
feature of further-higher education throughout the transitions outlines earlier.
In 2008 and at the time of writing a new system of quality assurance for furtherhigher
education went live after a number of pilots. This system of Internal
Quality Enhancement Reviews (IQER) recognised the distinctiveness of furtherhigher
provision while developing systems that were peer led rather than the
inspection model associated with FEC inspections by OFSTED and before that
the FEFC.
Trends and Trajectories in the Further-Higher Education Landscape
The four transitions outlined above witnessed the configuration and
reconfiguration of the further-higher interface and shifts in the definitions of what
FE and HE were. One consequence was that the further-higher interface was the
site of a number of anomalies and contradictions that were the result of the
institutional duality that had featured over the past twenty years and the legacies
of its separate sector histories and identities.
Firstly, there were the external institutional pressures that originate in the parallel
systems of regulation that have existed in the past. This can be divided into the
system of parallel regulation from 1988 up until 1996 and from 1997 the gradual
convergence of some regulatory structures to a model that could accommodate 
34
the distinctive character of English further-higher education. These changes
accelerated after 2001. However, for the most part significant differences
remained between how university based HE was quality assured and funded and
how further-higher education was. Examples of convergence include the
introduction of IQER from 2008 onwards to recognise the distinctiveness of
further-higher education. Earlier shifts away from indirect funding only income
streams or franchising that pre-existed Dearing towards direct, indirect funding
and consortiums based funding mechanisms represented another. These partial
forms of convergence co-existed with remaining differences between university
and non-university provision of HE.
Secondly, there continued to be differences between the level of centralisation
and decentralisation permitted by central government and its agencies that the
two sectors experienced. FECs had been familiar with a strong centralised steer
from the FEFC and reliance on external awarding bodies and therefore limited
autonomy. To a lesser extent the old polytechnics had a central system of
coordination through the quality assurance of their higher awards through the
CNAA. On the other hand the pre 1992 chartered universities enjoyed greater
autonomy and were traditionally subject to a far less central steer.
Further-higher education, at the same time, had gone through a series of stages
of exposure and insulation to the separate funding, planning and quality
assurance mechanisms that constituted its institutional environment. The
significance of different past experience of regulation at the further-higher
interface is linked to how effectively these developments will be adapted to
particular cultures and organisational forms found in FECs. For example will a 
35
dual or binary system of delivery be most effective in delivering further-higher
education in a traditional FEC setting?
Thirdly, the debate about widening participation and the role and function of
further-higher education in helping achieve this was polarised with supporters
seeing it as an inclusive movement and others seeing it as and exclusive one
adding to an already stratified system of HE with its own entrenched informal
hierarchies.
Other countervailing institutional pressures were the outcome of the
intensification of diversification and differentiation of HE more generally. Looking
at the system as a whole the massification of HE was linked to the emergence of
a wider range of providers, organisational forms and different missions among
organisations and increasing complexity and diversity. This highly differentiated
system was informally stratified across a number of dimensions. For example,
some providers were research intensive and others teaching intensive or
teaching only. Some provided academic courses in HE, others vocational. Some
had a local focus and others regional, national and international.
Differences in status, reputation and access to resources were a feature of this
massified system. What is more a number of interest groups emerged. The
research intensive Russell Group of elite universities received the bulk of the
research funding and carried the greater status and reputation. A swollen middle
of redbrick and new universities sat between this elite group and the furtherhigher
providers who in effect made up an incipient if informal tripartite system
within HE (Ainley, 2000, 2003). 
36
Later, through the introduction of new qualifications such as the foundation
degree differentiation was reinforced through further-higher education being
afforded a special mission to deliver short cycle, vocational intermediate levels of
HE usually on a part time basis and with the involvement of employers.
As the institutional duality of further-higher education was rooted in past sector
histories and in the different priorities and institutional environments that FE and
HE were familiar with this inevitably created some duplication, ambiguity and
tensions at the further-higher interface. This section has sought to contextualise
these tensions. It will assist a reading of the ‘fault lines’ in the emerging
institutional environment at the further-higher interface. Adaptation to a structured
duality that originates in the dual institutional environments to which this mode of
delivery has been subject in the past is an everyday reality lived through the
working practices of further-higher education providers on a day to day basis.
At each of the four institutional turns identified earlier the further-higher education
interface had been reconfigured and reclassified. The reconfiguration that
followed the phase of transition between 1988 and 1992 took place against a
background of a rapid increase in student numbers largely led by the
polytechnics but also indirectly via the franchising of HE to FECs. However, old
practices and sector loyalties did not disappear. Fundamental differences
between the sectors remained and in FECs there was also an intense and bitter
contractual dispute that led to long term industrial unrest following incorporation
in 1992. The university and non-university sectors were staffed under different 
37
terms and conditions with staff delivering further-higher education having greater
contact hours than those in the university sector.
Post-incorporation the adoption of private sector business practices arguably
went further in the FE sector. These changes were analogous to developments in
the public sector that emphasised increased efficiency and a reduction in the unit
of resource. In further-higher education the combined influence of the Jarrett
Report (1985) on HE and the work of the audit commission on FE (Holloway,
1998) which recommended the introduction of some of these private sector
practices had prepared the ground earlier for these reforms
At the time this reflected a wider global trend towards neo-liberalism that was
found in the public sector and the ideological dominance of ideas drawn from the
private sector that were premised upon the superiority of the market mechanism
and marketisation for delivering public services. These reforms witnessed a
blurring of the public-private divide and argued for more consumer choice. The
vehicle for driving enhanced choice was to be the market.
In reality what was operating in the pre Dearing phase of the evolution of furtherhigher
education were quasi-markets. The concept is derived from the work of
Glennester (1991) on education and Le Grand and Bartlett (1993) on social
policy. Quasi-markets are market like mechanisms that act as surrogates for pure
market mechanisms and are managed and steered usually by government. 
38
It was ERA that paved the way for the introduction of quasi-markets into what
had been the municipal sector of HE prior to 1988. In common with other sectors
in education ERA began to establish market like mechanisms to co-ordinate post
compulsory education. In the strictest sense of the term they were not pure
markets hence the qualifier quasi-markets. There was no pure price mechanism
in operation because in the end government set the costs paid to further-higher
providers and controlled supply and demand through funding incentives. Nor was
there freedom of entry for any new provider as would be the case in a pure
market. Nevertheless this was a significant shift from the pre-incorporation world
of public or municipal HE and the control of local authorities.
The tensions between markets or quasi-markets and a government steered
system of intervention that would encourage collaboration across sector and
organisational boundaries was a constant feature of the period between 1988
and 2008. At first quasi-markets were encouraged for delivering further-higher
education (HEFCE, 1996). After Dearing it was increasingly clear that markets
alone could not deal with the complexities of the further-higher interface and that
a stronger strategic steer towards collaboration would be necessary.
The increased complexity and diversity of further-higher education and its
interface has created what Rittel (1973) has termed a ‘wicked problem’ for
further-higher education. By this he means that in situations in which diversity,
complexity, fragmentation and ambiguous value laden goals co-exist then
solutions to the problem of how to co-ordinate and steer the system is not always
amenable to straight forward rational planning solutions. The result is a ‘wicked 
39
problem’ without a final solution. Dealing with such problems requires a different
approach and involves accommodating a range of interest groups and value
systems that may conflict.
Arguably FE and HE may start from different values premises about what furtherhigher
education actual should aspire to. FE with its vocational, part time
orientation and its experience of being overseen by external awarding bodies has
been described as providing high levels of pastoral support for its students. On
the other hand, the more independent learning styles that are more familiar in
university based HE stress different qualities tend to be more academic and seek
to encourage a different set of skills.
In further-higher and in university based HE in general there is the additional
problem of how to align equity issues and widen participation to HE to previously
under represented groups and to square that with the operation of market
mechanism.
Further-higher education is a complex enterprise. This chapter has indicated
some of the complexities that have given rise to the contemporary further-higher
landscape. At the time of writing change continues to be constant and furtherhigher
education continues to evolve. The result is neither FE nor HE but a mix of
both: in other words, there is a process of hybridisation taking place at the
further-higher education interface. 
40
This above has provided a historical and contextual description of the evolution of
further-higher education delivered in a non-university setting. It described and
contextualised the relationship of non-university based further-higher education
to the wider and more extensive university based sector of HE. The duality of
institutional environments and governance structures at the further-higher
education interface has been explored chronologically and in terms of its
significance for understanding the evolution of further-higher education and the
further-higher interface.
These developments have been contextualised through an exploration of a
number of transition points at which the classification of further-higher education
and FE and HE had changed. Shifts in inter-sector collaboration and
configurations of further-higher education at the interface have been outlined and
tensions between market like mechanisms and moves to strategic collaboration
emphasised. Finally the boundary work that takes place at the further-higher
interface has been situated against a constantly changing further-higher
landscape over a twenty year period.
In contextualising transitions at the further-higher interface four significant
institutional turns have constituted the critical events that have been instrumental
in the reconfiguration and reclassification of the further-higher interface.
Underpinning these transitions were a number of broader macro structural trends
and trajectories that reflect wider changes in the political economy of furtherhigher
education, the massification of English HE and a shift towards
marketisation. 
41
CHAPTER THREE
THE LITERATURE REVIEW
This chapter reviews the literature on further-higher education concentrating on
three main sets of sources. It considers the policy literature and focuses on its
significance for locating the policy context of further-higher education in a wider
theoretical framework. Its contribution to understanding how the further-higher
interface has been configured and evolved over a twenty year time frame is then
assessed. The next set of sources is drawn from the practitioner literature and
‘grey literature’ on further-higher provision. This is largely normative and
descriptive. It is often difficult to locate or to find systematic overviews of what is
available. Finally, literature derived from peer reviewed academic sources that are
not always focussed on further-higher education are consulted. Collectively these
consist of a range of materials from different disciplinary traditions. This literature
has been used to construct a cross disciplinary analytical framework for theorising
further-higher education. The aim of this synthesis is to develop a conceptual
understanding of the dynamics of the further-higher interface and the boundary
work that takes place there.
The policy context illustrating the evolution of further-higher education is
considered initially. For the most part the policy literature considered is restricted 
42
to, and largely describes, how policy developments in further-higher education
have taken place since 1988. It can be sub-divided into literature that covers
government initiatives and legislation dealing with further-higher education and
those materials produced by intermediary agencies and FE and HE based
organisations. A limited number of historical and descriptive accounts of policy on
further-higher education are also included. Few of these sources attempted to
conceptualise the policy context within a wider theoretical framework.
Next, the practitioner literature is described supplemented by the ‘grey literature’. A
feature of this literature is that a wide range of sources exists that have been
produced for different interests, audiences and purposes. It tends to cover a short
time frame, is problem focussed and does not always provide accounts of its
underpinning methodological and theoretical assumptions within a broader
disciplinary tradition. It therefore consists of a set of literature that typically has not
been designed to provide a consistent theoretically informed body of knowledge.
Much of it is exploratory; is unsystematic and is not usually peer reviewed.
Generally it is oriented to specific organisational or sector issues. While useful it is
limited for the purpose of developing a theoretical case study of the evolution of
further-higher education. Often produced for operational reasons that have been
designed to progress an understanding of a rapidly evolving field, it has not always
been straightforward to access because of its scattered nature and restricted
circulation and publication.
A final body of literature is the academic literature. The more significant of these
contributions have, for the purpose of this thesis, been drawn from two main 
43
disciplinary areas. One is drawn from sociological accounts of organisational
theory and particularly those neo-institutionalist theorists that have explored the
role of institutions and institutionalisation in organisational life. A central concept
derived from this literature was to be used develop a neo-institutionalist analysis of
the emergence of further-higher education as a maturing ‘organisational field’ and
the institutionalisation of organisational practices in its field. These insights have
been applied to understanding the institutional environment of further-higher
education, its institutional duality as a mode of provision that is neither FE nor HE,
and the emergence of new organisational forms at its interface. A conceptual
vocabulary is constructed to assist in the analysis of the further-higher interface
that drew on this emergent neo-institutionalist tradition.
This literature contributes to theory development yet is at an early stage of the
development of a mature disciplinary body of theory associated with
conceptualising the further-higher interface. Much of what is available still lacks a
cumulative theoretical and methodological foundation that is rooted in any one
established disciplinary tradition. In terms of subject identities, academic studies on
further-higher education do not constitute a clearly defined or well established
tradition. Moreover, further-higher education providers tend not to have established
research cultures in the sense that traditional university based HE does.
The insights that are derived from these inter-disciplinary literatures are
synthesised into one analytical framework. The institutional, sector and
organisational boundaries and boundary work that exist in further-higher education
are then contextualised and analysed through a theoretical exploration of the 
44
institutionalisation of organisational change in the further-higher organisational
field. A review of the potential contribution of these diverse disciplinary traditions
and literatures for developing research questions for understanding further-higher
education is undertaken.
In combination the policy literature, the practitioner literature and academic
literature feeds into the construction of an exploratory and theoretically led case
study of the development of further-higher education over a twenty year time
frame.
An Overview of the Further-Higher Education ‘Field’
There is no one current synthesis of the burgeoning and diverse literatures on
further-higher education provision that combines existing knowledge in one
accessible format. Abramson (1996) had produced one earlier commentary and
overview but that is now over a decade old. Nevertheless it provided a useful
overview of the available knowledge of further-higher education that existed on the
eve of the influential Dearing Report. Since Dearing there has been almost
constant change and the institutional and organisational landscape of furtherhigher
provision has undergone significant transformations. Not only has the
institutional and organisational landscape shifted significantly but further-higher
education has come to play a much more prominent role in widening participation
to HE. Consequently there is a need for a synthesis of the literature that can inform
the construction of a theoretical and conceptual understanding of the contemporary
further-higher landscape. 
45
Yet there remain significant gaps in the data that is available for making
comparisons between the FE and HE sectors (Copland et al, 2008, Parry and
Thompson, 2002, 2003, 2004). These gaps are both empirical and conceptual.
Different methods and conventions have been used to gather statistics for FE and
HE provision in the past and this has limited what lessons can be learned to further
understanding of further-higher education. Different emphasis on policy priorities
and goals at the further-higher interface also contributed to a relatively poorly
understood non-university based provision. Until Dearing further-higher education
was largely overshadowed by the much bigger university based sector of HE.
Consequently knowledge of the size, shape and scope of further-higher education
has been patchy in the past. Comparisons with the university based provision of
HE have also been limited.
As an academic ‘field’ (Grenfell and James, 2004) meaning a set of shared
methodological assumptions, a conceptual vocabulary and an established
disciplinary tradition further-higher education is under developed and marginal to
mainstream analysis of university based HE. It lacks a distinct disciplinary tradition
that is theoretically informed when compared to those that focus on university
based HE. The following sections outline the potential contribution of the policy,
practitioner and academic literature to help fill this gap. 
46
The Policy Context
Assessing the policy literature’s contribution to informing, communicating and to
facilitating the implementation of policy in further-higher education can be divided
into two main phases of development. One of the more notable features of the
policy literature on further-higher education is that it followed rather than preceded
the many changes at the further-higher interface particularly during the cycle of
‘low policy’ identified earlier. It was largely dominated by the university HE sector
leading the policy changes that impacted on further-higher education providers. As
the latter were actually responsible to the learning and skills sector for their
infrastructure and day to day operation there was a certain amount of duplication
with parallel systems operating.
Prior to 1997 and the publication of the Dearing Report, further-higher education
witnessed relatively little interest from policy makers. This was associated with
what Parry et al (2002) have referred to as a cycle of ‘low policy’ or no policy.
During this phase English further-higher education was largely marginal in terms of
its contribution to active policy making. In this phase policy makers were largely
silent on the role and function of further-higher education provision.
The second phase following the Dearing Report of 1997 witnessed an increase in
the volume and frequency of policy documents that dealt with further-higher
education producers as its profile was enhanced. These covered among other
things investigations into the costs of providing further-higher education, the
publication of codes of conduct for its delivery, guides to best practice for 
47
practitioners and investigations into the scale and scope of further higher provision.
Later, consultations and an increasing numbers of collaborative audits of furtherhigher
provision were produced that added to the sum of knowledge about its
delivery and attempts made to align statistical data across the sectors. The
Dearing Report itself and a range of government publications and pieces of
legislation dealing directly or indirectly with further-higher education are also
considered. The increase in the volume of policy documents produced on furtherhigher
education was coterminous with the maturation of further-higher education
as a distinct mode of provision delivering short cycle, vocational and largely part
time HE qualifications. It is this maturation of the further-higher education as an
organisational field (see below) that this thesis has attempted to conceptualise and
theorise.
If peer reviewed materials on further-higher education are relatively scarce, which
may not be unexpected given the relative recent arrival (or rediscovery) in policy
terms of further-higher education as a significant component of HE, the study of
further-higher education has recently taken on a higher profile. There does appear
to be the beginnings of an evolving research tradition dealing with further-higher
interface although it is only relatively recently that this has evolved (Parry et al,
2008). This has built on the limited evidence base in existence prior to the raising
of the profile of further-higher education post Dearing.
Bocock and Scott (1994, 1999) addressed the evolution of further-higher education
and its increasingly significant role in widening participation and access in terms of
fundamental shifts in the student experience, student demography and the different 
48
approaches to leaning and teaching and cultures found across FE and HE. The
core question posed was whether existing configurations and the boundaries that
categorise further-higher education are becoming more permeable?
Other articles investigated the further-higher interface from a business perspective.
Two early examples of these were articles that discussed further-higher education
as an instance of private sector business format franchising (Morris, 1993, Palmer
1992, Yorke, 1993). The articles addressed the lessons that could be learned from
private sector practices if they were transferred to understanding further-higher
education. Morris and Palmer investigated the contribution of private sector
business format franchising for developing educational franchises. Yorke
discussed issues to do with quality assuring franchising in HE. Another body of
literature examined the introduction of private sector practices in the public sector
and specifically the rise of the new public management (NPM) and managerialism.
These are explored below.
Other reports had begun to construct a preliminary sketch of the landscape and
scale and scope of further-higher education (Rawlinson et al, 1997). By the turn of
the new century an increasing number of commentators were beginning to point
out the slim evidence base and problems in comparing statistical data across the
FE and HE sectors (Parry et al, 2002, Copland et al, 2008) and a need to build a
firmer evidence base on further-higher education on which to base policy.
What is missing in much of this literature is a philosophical debate about the nature
of further-higher education as a form of HE. Most accounts deal with the 
49
bureaucratic and administrative conventions and the technical and legal
distinctions that distinguish FE from HE (Garrod and McFarlane, 2007) or its
historical genesis. There is an urgent need to move on to address core issues that
consider fundamental questions about what HE in further-higher education should
be. Specifically, conceptually and philosophically there has been little in depth
analysis of what further-higher education is and in what way it differs from FE or
HE. If, as is argued by some, there is some currency in abolishing the distinctions
between FE and HE (Young, 2002, 2006), the dynamics of boundaries at the
further-higher interface is still poorly understood. Boundaries between FE and HE
may well serve positive and negative functions in widening participation.
Finally literature classifying further-higher education and the organisational forms
found there needs to be situated in a broader analytical framework that can
capture shifts in terminology and conventions over time. Tracking the institutional
and organisational changes of a turbulent and constantly changing interface would
benefit from a framework that can map shifts in the configuration of the interface.
One neo-institutionalist account of classification systems that is developed in this
thesis with this goal in mind is based on the work of Douglas (1966) on grid-group
analysis. It will be applied to understanding the institutionalisation of classification
systems in further-higher education. Douglas is interested in how boundaries within
systems of classification represent potential anomalies that may threaten the
integrity of existing systems of classification. The classification of boundaries in FE
and HE and at the further-higher interface is conceptualised using this neoinstitutionalist
framework as a heuristic device for capturing the tensions and
paradoxes found at the further-higher interface. 
50
The various literatures considered here, therefore, need to be evaluated in this
context. The amount of materials available has increased but its methodological
and theoretical sophistication is at an early stage of development. There remain
gaps in the amount of analytically and conceptually informed materials that can
contribute to developing a theoretical corpus of knowledge that helps progress
understanding of the further-higher interface and the hybrid further-higher
organisational forms found there.
Much of the early policy literature then was highly exploratory not least because
the dominant university based traditional HE sector which was, in many cases,
unfamiliar with further-higher education provision. Although this was less true of
the ‘new universities’ there were still gaps in knowledge of the scale and scope of
further-higher education.
In the phase of ‘low policy’ or no policy (Parry and Thompson, 2002) further-higher
education was considered marginal and peripheral to the core business of HE.
Regulatory bodies in FE and HE did not have a clearly demarcated remit for
dealing with the interstitial zone of further-higher education. When an early report
by the FEFC and HEFCE on collaborative provision was produced in 1993
(Abramson, 1996, p 195) it was based on only fifteen visits to seven HE providers
and eight FECs delivering further-higher education. In 1995 a report on
collaborative audits used only cases that had been conducted as evidence and
thirteen of these had been undertaken in the old polytechnic sector (HEQC, 1995). 
51
An early report on further-higher collaboration (DES, 1991) identified that
resourcing, uneven staff development and the systems in place for quality
assurance were all considered to require attention. The strengths of further-higher
provision were identified in terms of accessibility, ethos, strong systems of pastoral
support and the psychological and cultural familiarity of further-higher providers to
non traditional students in comparison to what were perceived as more threatening
and culturally unfamiliar forms of HE.
Other reports reflected a pragmatic commitment to market mechanisms and
marketisation for extending provision (HEFCE, 1996). The reliance on market
mechanisms for coordinating further-higher education provision was to be
addressed in the Dearing Report (NCIHE, 1997) which was to be a symbolic
marker for a shift in policy with regard to further-higher education. Dearing marked
the beginnings of a move towards a more interventionist pattern of structured
collaboration in further-higher education. While competition within sectors was
encouraged competition across sectors was not and structured collaboration and
semi-compulsory partnerships became the preferred mode of coordinating the
interface.
After Dearing, the production of policy literature focussed on further-higher
education became more frequent. The HEFCE and QAA had now to deal with a
larger number of further-higher education providers who had not been part of their
remit before. 
52
Post Dearing the demands on policy makers overseeing the interface were
reflected in this increase in the volume of policy directives and investigative audits,
consultations and guides to good practice. Some followed on from earlier
investigations of the relevant costs of further-higher education (HEFCE, 1998,
1998a, 1998c, 1999, 2000a).
The issuing of codes of practice for indirect and direct further-higher education
provision and consortia (HEFCE, 1999, 2000), and the increase in the evidence
base as a consequence of the growth in collaborative audits of further-higher
education provision, gave a greater level of understanding and firmer policy steer
to providers (QAA, 2004, 2006).
Overall, the policy literature on further-higher education during this twenty year
period is characterised by a contrast between an early phase of ‘low policy’ in
which policy followed practice and the era of ‘high policy’ and semi-compulsory
partnerships in which a more strategic approach was adopted.
The Practitioner and ‘Grey Literature’ Literature
The practitioner and ‘grey literature’ available on further-higher education has been
reviewed by Jones (2006) and Schofield (2007). It was not always easy to access.
Much of the literature could be described as variable in quality and diverse in
purpose. A consequence is that it is difficult to abstract from this literature key
themes or to identify materials that can contribute to cumulative and unified body of
theoretical knowledge on further-higher education. Reluctance on the part of some 
53
further-higher providers to share materials was one additional problem identified by
Jones.
However, apart from its pragmatic purpose in informing operational practice, there
are significant limitations in terms of the extent to which the practitioner literature
was rooted in theoretical frameworks or explicitly formulated methodological
assumptions that could assist comparison.
Consequently, there are limits to what the practitioner and ‘grey literature’ can
contribute to developing a further-higher education ‘field’ of studies. The purpose
and goals of this literature need to be considered in assessing its relevance for
informing the wider policy debate. Moreover, for each source that championed the
claims of the distinctiveness of further-higher education there were sceptics who
doubted its capacity to deliver in the longer term. Scaife (2004), for example,
represented the sceptics and argued that FE was rooted in a culture of the ‘now’
that made research by practitioners in FE difficult and marginal.
The literature on further-higher education can be divided by its purpose or function.
The practitioner and ‘grey literature’ was usually designed for specific goals and
aimed at operational issues although the developmental and dissemination of best
practice frequently has a high priority. Much was teaching focused or oriented to
short term organisational goals.
A wider range of literature addressed an eclectic body of issues related to furtherhigher
education but there is no one convenient and accessible source that could 
54
be turned to in order to give a synoptic picture of its evolution. Literature that
bemoaned the lack of a research culture in further-higher education and FE
included work by Brotherton (1996) and Elliot, (1996, 1996a).
For example, Elliot has argued there were structural, historical and ideological
reasons why research in FE remained relatively invisible which inevitably impacted
on research in further-higher education. Brotherton argued for a need to build a
research infrastructure in FE in order to enhance organisational performance but
had doubts that research was viewed as a core activity in FECs. Other practitioner
based literatures were the outcome of collaborations between practitioners and HE
based researchers.
Overall this practitioner literature paints a picture of rapid organisational
transformation and instability in FE that makes it difficult for many smaller providers
to embed research on further-higher education within FECs independent of
university based HE researchers. Overwhelmingly FE practitioners are seen as
transmitters of pre codified knowledge rather than as producers of new knowledge
through research. For further-higher practitioners this creates dilemmas and poses
questions about what constitutes scholarship and research in an FE institutional
environment that is consistent with delivering higher level work. The practitioner
literature reflects this tension and the institutional duality of further-higher
education. 
55
The Academic Literature: Synthesis and Analysis
A significant amount of the policy and practitioner literature covered here has
looked at the impact of the introduction of NPM reforms in FE and HE and in
particular the influence of marketisation, massification and managerialism on
operational practices. For practitioners these would have been highly visible
aspects of their day to day practice. Arguably the impact of these reforms went
furthest in FE and by implication those FECs delivering further-higher education
were profoundly affected. The following section begins with an account of how
those institutional and organisational changes have been conceptualised in the
academic literature and attempts to link them to broader debates about blurring
boundaries in further-higher education while evaluating their relevance for
understanding its interface.
The bulk of available literature on the significance of these reforms has been
developed for understanding the change in the public sector more generally. The
impact of NPM reforms on further-higher education should be understood against
these wider ideological trends and shifts in the categorisation of public and private
provision as ideologically disputed claims.
The rise of a neo-liberal economic doctrine has arguably been the dominant
ideological framework through which many reforms that have been introduced in
the public sector over the last twenty years were justified (Andresani and Ferlie,
2006 Clarke and Newman, 1996, Ferlie, 2008, Hood, 1991, 1998, Pollitt, 1993,
20000, Pollitt and Bouckaert, 2000). These broader trends in public sector reforms 
56
were also reflected in the changes taking place in FE and HE and at the furtherhigher
interface.
The rise of NPM reforms and managerialism in both FE (Hanningan, 2007,
McTavish, 2003, Randle and Brady, 1997a, 1997b) and HE (Bleiklie, 1998, Deem,
1998, 2001, Deem and Brehony, 2005, Ferlie, 2008, Trow, 1994, Trowler, 1998,
2001) has been associated with developments in the post incorporation furtherhigher
landscape that introduced marketisation and accelerated massification into
both FE and HE. The audit commission (Holloway, 1998) in FE and the Jarratt
Committee (1985) in HE had prepared the way for these transitions by arguing that
both FE and HE needed to be more ‘business like’ through adopting private sector
corporate practices. The reports were instrumental in preparing the way for later
reforms in further-higher education. The relevance of these reforms for the analysis
of further-higher education undertaken here is largely restricted to the changes that
followed ERA in 1988 and the Further and Higher Education Act in 1992. However,
pressure for reform was already underway prior to then.
`
While NPM and managerialist reforms still remain controversial there is no doubt
there has been a significant shift in the governance in how FE and HE are
regulated and whether these changes will have an equitable impact across the
further-higher interface. Again there is little literature that has investigated the
impact of these reforms across inter-organisational boundaries in further-higher
education or the different management practices that apply to FE and HE. There is
however, as indicated above, a body of literature that deals with FE and HE as
separate sectors. 
57
One area that has generally received more attention in the literature is the impact
of marketisation and massification (Trow, 1970, 1973, 1974) in HE in further-higher
education, as HE has moved from elite to a mass system of post-compulsory
education. The dynamics of these changes are explored in the thesis though
drawing on a neo-institutionalist perspective that emphasises the role of markets in
economic life.
At the same time as market mechanisms were being introduced central control
through intermediaries such as the FEFC had been strengthened. FE was
increasingly micro managed by targets and sanctions as funding converged to a
national standard tariff. These managed markets in FE coexisted with similar
trends taking place in HE but at a different pace, sequence and level of intensity.
The HEFCE and QAA established a similar ‘playing field’ for the new university
sector post 1992. After Dearing, that was extended to further-higher provision.
Cycles of market led expansion followed by caps on numbers followed by another
cycle of expansion post Dearing led to an uneasy tension between market led
change and collaboration. Conceptualising the interaction of market and nonmarket
modes of coordination at the further-higher interface is one area that the
literature suggests more theoretical work could be done.
Commentators who investigate shifts in the relation of the state to markets and HE
providers include Marginson (2007) who concentrates on the rise of a global HE
market place and HE existing status as a scarce positional good. He draws the 
58
concept of a positional good from the economist Hirsch and in essence argues that
providing more HE provision does not necessarily reduce inequalities. Positional
goods maintain their scarcity value in relation to alternatives provision through a
range of mechanisms. In the case of further-higher education its status as a
positional good only makes sense relationally in comparison to alternative modes
of HE provision.
Perhaps, this is one of the more important features of the development of furtherhigher
education since 1988. The cyclical swing from markets and demand-led
funding and pump priming, to structured collaboration and semi-compulsory
partnerships at the further-higher interface over twenty years can only be
understood in the context of its past structural separation into FE and HE sectors.
There was a limited evidence base used to evaluate claims on how effective
market reforms had been at the further-higher interface. And although the Dearing
Report of 1997 would mark a watershed recognising the significance of furtherhigher
education no sustained analytical or theoretical critique and analysis of the
workings of the market in further-higher education existed.
The issue of how to align the market mechanisms associated with reform with a
commitment to equity is at the core of the ‘wicked problem’ of further-higher
education. The question is: how to increase organisational diversity and widen
participation rates and access to HE for non traditional students while maintaining
quality, equity of access and a comparability of provision that was different but
facilitated equal access across the further-higher interface? Earlier claims had 
59
argued the case for further-higher education as distinctive and different but an
equal form of provision (Abramson et al, 1996). However, conceptualising the
impact of differences in access, resources, power and status between furtherhigher
and university based HE providers needs to be theorised rather than merely
described. Dealing with equity issues in what was an already diversified system of
university based HE provision was to prove controversial.
Indeed, further-higher education occupies a position at the interface of HE that is
stratified by long standing differences in status, reputation and access to resources
and wealth. It has not yet found its position as a legitimate mode of post–
compulsory higher-education provision according to some commentators (Parry,
2008).
Representative commentaries on these debates that focus on university based HE
include Shavit et al (2007) on diversity in HE systems, Slaughter and Leslie (1997)
on the rise of ‘academic capitalism’, Teichler (1998, 2007) on diversity and
absolute versus relative inequalities in HE systems and Huisman, (2007) again on
diversity.
One argument is that increasing numbers in HE does not always reduce wider
structural inequalities because existing informal stratification orders with its
organisational field persist and are reproduced. The HE ‘brand’ as a category
remains a scarce and contested resource and positioning further-higher education
within this context needs to take the scarcity argument into account. Moreover, the 
60
legitimacy of further-higher delivery within a mass higher education system is
contested (Parry, 2008).
If the claims being made here lend some support that the increased diversification
of an HE system inevitably leads to increased stratification then the ‘wicked
problem’ of further-higher education is how to manage it and how to conceptualise
the linkages. Increasing complexity of the system increases coordination problems
as the system becomes more diverse. But there may also be a fundamental value
clash at stake here. FE and HE sector identities and values still remain firmly
entrenched (Smith, 2008), although claims that the distinctive ethos, scale and
scope of further-higher education are what makes it different from university based
HE need more firmly substantiating. As Parry et al (2002) have argued such claims
are often inferred and not always explicitly made and backed by evidence.
Comparisons with other similar systems of further-higher provision in other
countries such as American community colleges may provide additional insights to
the extent that they are broadly similar to English further-higher provision. They are
also further down the road towards a mass HE system than the English system.
Materials on the role and function of American community colleges (Brint and
Karabel, 1989, Clark, 1960, Dougherty, 2001) have made claims that argue that
the American community college performs a ‘diversionary function’ or assists in a
‘cooling out’ process (Clark, 1960). Brint and Karabel (1989) use the phrase
‘anticipatory subordination’ to describe the function of American community 
61
colleges in aligning the aspirations of community college students with the
demands of the labour market and economy.
The term ‘diversionary function’ derives from Dougherty’s (2001) investigation of
the contradictory goals, missions and tensions that are found in American
community colleges. Dougherty argues that the tensions and conflicting gaols to
which American community colleges are subjected are incompatible. Situated
between the academic and vocational institutional logics they try to achieve
different things. According to Dougherty, as a vehicle of democratisation,
community colleges widen participation; as alternative providers to university
based HE. They also perform a diversionary function diverting potential students
away from elite providers.
Clark (1960) refers to the ‘cooling out’ function of the American community college.
He argues that student aspirations are lowered through their experience of
studying in a community college so that they seek more ‘realistic’ future career
opportunities. Analogously English further-higher providers may be acting as a
buffer to sift and sort and socialise potential entrants to HE in ways that reproduce
existing structures of inequality (Bathmaker, 2008).
What each of these approaches has in common is their positioning of the
community college as occupying a structurally subordinate position in a wider
organisational field and their role and function as axis of systemic differentiation.
Analogously the role and function of English further-higher education can only be 
62
understood relationally and holistically in terms of a wider political economy that
treats the further-higher interface as part of one integral system.
One body of literature that potentially could illuminate the workings of markets and
non-market mechanisms of coordination at the further-higher interface is based
upon studies of markets as institutions and specifically a neo-institutionalist
analysis of their dynamics. The analytical framework that is developed throughout
the thesis is based upon a neo-institutionalist reading of the evolution and
maturation of the further-higher interface. The institutionalisation of market and non
market behaviour and market mechanisms at the interface can be contextualised
through this literature as part of a broader political economy of further-higher
provision.
This is not an approach that has hitherto been applied to the study of the furtherhigher
interface on any large scale although some studies that adopt a neoinstitutionalist
approach have been attempted in HE (Frolich, 2005, Maasen and
Stensaker, 2005). A conceptual and theoretical approach informed by the neoinstitutionalist
literature would be useful in further-higher education.
Another body of literature that has covered similar areas is the sub-discipline of
economic sociology. This is a discipline that explores the relationship of the
economic and social factors in the analysis of economic life and the role of
institutions and other forms of economic co-ordination other than markets. It is
useful for understanding further-higher education because it can be applied to
conceptualising the relationship of market and non market led institutional and 
63
organisational change at the further-higher interface as an aspect of its wider
political economy.
Key authors in the tradition draws from an economic sociology of markets and non
market economic behaviour. They have been identified in a comprehensive
volume edited by Smelser and Swedberg (1994) that assessed the state of
development of this paradigm. This has been complemented by the work of
Swedberg (1991). Among other significant contributions to the development of a
sociological approach to understanding markets as social structures are: Abolafai
(1998), Baker (1984), Beckert (2002), Burt (1992), Callon, 1998), Fligstein (1996),
Granovetter (1985), Hamilton and Woolsey Biggart (1988), Lie (1992, 1997),
Poldonyi (1993) White (1981) and Swedberg’s (1998).
The intellectual and sociological tradition that this literature is derived from has
emphasised the institutional basis of economic life and the role of institutions in
classifying, constraining and enabling economic action. What these authors have
in common is that they question the hegemony of a neo-liberal economic model
and an under-socialised concept of ‘economic man’ for understanding complex
problems. Instead they present an alternative that examines the iteration of market
and non market mechanisms and the embeddedness of economic action in social
relations and the institutionalisation of organisational practices.
In terms of the contribution of this literature to understanding the further-higher
interface one aspect of particular significance is the analysis of the processes
whereby policy becomes implemented as practice. The concept of embeddedness 
64
first developed by Granovetter (1975) is useful for conceptualising this and is a
core concept in the literature in economic sociology.
Granovetter has argued that neither an over socialised concept nor an under
socialised concept of ‘economic man’ is adequate for understanding economic
behaviour. In his view all economic behaviour is embedded in social relations and
social relations are coordinated through institutions and institutional environments.
Applied to further-higher education agents act in contexts and institutional and
organisational configurations that are not of their own making. However, successful
policy initiatives must also become embedded in practice and that cannot be taken
for granted. Formal pronouncements are not sufficient in themselves to create
institutional and organisational change, although they are obviously necessary.
Thus the relevance of these inter-disciplinary literatures for understanding furtherhigher
education is that they assist in the conceptualisation of the further-higher
interface in theorising the hybridisation of the dual structures, cultures and
practices found at its interface as a process of institutionalisation. The literature
can thus help facilitate the construction of an analytical framework to inform the
development of a political economy of further-higher education that stresses the
iteration of the economic, social and political in further-higher education and how
policy becomes embedded as practice.
The following section explores how the boundary between market and non-market
mechanisms of coordination are negotiated by further-higher providers and the role 
65
and functions of intermediary or hybrid organisational forms and boundary objects
in mediating this process.
Boundaries and Boundary Work
The literature on organisational boundaries drawn from organisational theory and
institutional theory provides a means of conceptualising the dynamics of the
further-higher education interface. This literature considers how boundaries and
boundary work across sector and organisational boundaries can be understood
and the role they play in the institutionalisation of new organisational practices.
The role and function of boundaries in configuring the further-higher education
interface needs to be understood holistically and relationally in order to capture the
processes of collaboration across the interface. Conceptualising the boundary
zones of further-higher provision as transition points at which transactions and
exchanges take place is an important step in understanding this constant process
of organising and disorganising.
One relevant body of literature has been produced by theorists who have done
work on boundaries in the social studies of science and technology. They have
considered the role of boundaries, boundary objects and boundary organisations
as mediators of practices across sector as well as organisational divides.
Prominent among these are those theorists who draw their ideas from ANT
amongst which were Callon (1991), Latour (1987) and Law (1992). Collectively
their work attempts to move beyond analysis based upon dichotomies of subject 
66
and object or of structure and action and to treat networks of subject, materials,
things, organisations and objects as an inter-related whole captured within one
conceptual framework. In terms of application of these approaches to
conceptualising the further-higher interface ANT emphasises a dialectical and
holistic approach that considers interfaces relationally and contextually and
boundaries as parts of one integrated system and one context.
Other work that has been done on the concept of boundary objects by Starr and
Greissemer (1989) is originally derived from ANT. Boundary objects sit between
two social worlds and mediate different value systems, organisational structures,
processes and cultures. They may take the form of policy documents, events or
processes. In further-higher education the different sector histories, cultures and
practices can often create difficulties in understanding and communicating across
sector and organisational boundaries. Understanding the role and function of
boundary objects in further-higher education can contribute to conceptualising its
dynamics.
A related concept is that of boundary organisation Guston (2001). Boundary
organisations sit between distinct social worlds or organisational contexts acting as
mediators to communicate across sector divides. The concept was first developed
to understand the science-policy interface and how the findings of scientists were
communicated to non scientists. Similarly boundary organisations in further-higher
education are those organisations that are situated at the further-higher interface
and are purposively designed to mediate between separate sector identities,
cultures and understandings. 
67

Another related tradition is the communities of practices literature (Lave and
Wenger, 1991). This looks at how practitioners working in different organisations
can work across organisational boundaries through shared communities of practice
and understanding that cross organisational divides. Based on the idea of situated
learning it is contextual and holistic in approach. What unites these disparate
traditions is their focus on how institution, sector and organisational boundaries are
negotiated maintained and crossed.
The insights derived from these literatures could be usefully transferred to
understanding the changing role and functions of boundary organisations in
further-higher education. Bodies such as the HEFCE, QAA and LSC engage in
boundary work as boundary organisations. Boundary objects are produced by
boundary organisations to bridge sector divides.
Other literatures from organisational theory that deal with the relationship between
organisations and their environment and the boundary setting and boundary
maintenance function could be usefully developed for insights to understanding the
paradoxes and tensions found at the further-higher interface. Examples of these
literatures include the work of Heracleous (2004), Hernes (2005), Borys and
Jemison, (1989), Menard (2004), Santos and Eisenhardt (2005) and Thompson
(1967). The insights that this literature can provide for understanding further-higher
education include advancing an understanding of inter-organisational collaboration
in further-higher provision and exploring the role of hybrid organisations and
organisational forms in further-higher provision. 
68
The literature that deals with the relationship between organisations and their
institutional environment could be developed to understand the boundary
paradoxes and tensions that are found at the further-higher interface. Firstly, the
liminal and interstitial position of further-higher education could be investigated in
terms of a wider political economy. Secondly, the boundary work and exchanges
that cross sector and inter-organisational boundaries in further-higher education
can be conceptualised in terms of their structural attributes and their relation to
their institutional environment.
Williamson’s (1975) work on transaction costs theory represents one possible
approach. He analyses why particular governance structures are adopted to
oversee transactions and exchanges across a technically separable boundary. He
argues the governance structure, whether it is a market, a firm, a network or some
hybrid of these will be chosen because it is the most efficient in reducing
transaction costs. This is an economic argument that stresses efficiency
considerations generally associated with the new institutional economics. In effect
it is a relaxed version of a neo-classical model that incorporates institutions into the
analysis but retains fundamental neo-classical economics assumption about
economically rational behaviour.
An alternative sociological variant on boundary work emphasises the
institutionalisation of organisational practices and economic action through a
social, cultural and cognitive lens. The neo-institutionalist analysis of the furtherhigher
organisational fields that is at the centre of this analysis conceptualises 
69
boundary work at the interface in its symbolic, cultural and social dimensions as
well as the purely economic. Friedland and Alford (1991) use the term ‘institutional
logics’ to describe the underlying values, norms and beliefs that are embedded as
organisational practice through a process of institutionalisation. FE and HE could
be described as sectors whose structures, cultures and practices are premised on
distinct institutional logics. The question of how further-higher can be
conceptualised as a category and as a set of legitimised practices is pertinent
here. Indeed, the process of hybridisation that is taking place at the further-higher
interface is configuring and reconfiguring the interface in different mixes and
permutations of FE and HE structures, cultures and practices.
Other authors consider the mechanisms whereby knowledge is transferred across
organisational boundaries. Carlile (2002), for example, identifies the properties of
boundaries in knowledge transfer and the syntactic, semantic and pragmatic
processes of translating and transferring knowledge successfully across discrete
organisational boundaries.
Smith (2008) has recently attempted a similar investigation attempting to
understand the diversity and complexity of the further-higher interface in terms of
how its organisational boundaries are formulated, maintained and crossed. He
argued that the non-university further-higher provider has been relatively neglected
and under-theorised. In particular the institutionalisation of boundary work at the
further-higher interface and the relative permeability or persistence of boundaries
needs further investigation. Burns (2007) made a provisional attempt to explore the
role of boundary work in further-higher education and their significance for 
70
understanding further-higher education. A further body of work that did not focus
on further-higher education but was designed to conceptualise the boundaries
between and within fields in HE other than further-higher education has been
produced by Maton (2005) and Naidoo (2004). Both authors have used the
concept of a ‘field’ drawn from Bourdieu to construct their analysis.
Bourdieu’s concepts of ‘field’ and habitus as they have been used by Maton and
Naidoo are useful for exploring further-higher education relationship to its cognate
HE ‘field’. Further-higher education as an organisational field is integral to
university based HE; they overlap and interact in a symbiotic relationship of mutual
dependence. But this is not a symmetrical relationship and power, status and
reputation asymmetries define the interface. Values rooted in different FE and HE
sector legacies and identities and access to status and resources are contested at
the interface. Moreover, within the further-higher organisational field distinct
institutional logics co-exist in tandem. This state of institutional duality within the
organisational filed reflects the duality of the external institutional environment of
further-higher education and becomes internalised in the organisational practices
of further-higher providers.
Bathmaker (2007) drew on Bourdieu’s work to explore student transitions in
further-higher education and the positioning of providers in a rapidly shifting
environment in which the further-higher interface was being reconfigured. Staff and
students in further-higher providers studied by Bathmaker were aware of these
differences and factored them into decisions whether to continue studying in a
further-higher provider or to transfer to a university based provider of HE. More 
71
generally the concept of ‘field’ as used in conceptualising further-higher education
is a construct for understanding not only of student positioning strategies within a
field but staff and organisational positioning at the interface of two once separate
field overlapping at a reconfigured further-higher interface. In that sense the
further-higher education organisational field is a subordinate component of a wider
and larger HE field that has moved from its margins to a more central if still
dependent position.
Other studies that deal with the institutional and organisational process of
hybridisation offer some analytical purchase on understanding the dynamics of the
further-higher interface.
Revisiting the Further-Higher Education ‘Field’
The literature review has drawn on a diverse range of academic sources to
complement the policy and practitioner literature. In constructing an analytical
framework for analysing further-higher education the contribution of organisational
theory and a neo-institutionalist analysis of organisational change at the furtherhigher
interface has been used to synthesis these sources and to construct a
conceptual vocabulary that can assist theory development. One of the central
concepts used in that vocabulary was the concept of an organisational field. A neoinstitutional
analysis of the evolution of a maturing further-higher organisational
field was then attempted. 
72
The concept of a field originated with Bourdieu (1992) although it was later
developed and extended by DiMaggio and Powell (1983, 1991) in their
conceptualisation of the evolution of organisational fields. Bourdieu’s original
concept was meant to capture the contested and disputed struggle over resources,
status and legitimacy in a field. His used of the concept of a field needs to be
considered analytically as integrated whole in combination with his associated
concepts of capital and habitus.
DiMaggio and Powell’s version of sociological institutionalism or new
institutionalism (the terms are sometimes used interchangeably), on the other
hand, is designed to capture processes of institutional isomorphism. Isomorphism
occurs in an organisational field when institutional pressures drive organisations in
the field to convergence towards similar organisational forms and structures. On
this point Bourdieu and DiMaggio and Powell differ in their emphasis on the extent
to which the incumbents of a field conform to institutionalised norms and values.
For DiMaggio and Powell isomorphic pressures originating in the institutional
environment of the field lead to convergence. For Bourdieu there is a constant
process of struggle and positioning within a field through the reproduction of social,
economic and cultural capital.
In the instance of the evolution of the further-higher organisational field a
complicating factor is its institutional duality. Distinct institutional logics operate
within the field with one set of values and practices originating in FE and the other
in HE. Further-higher education is a hybrid situated at the point of intersection of
these institutional logics and subject to institutional pressures that coexist. Under 
73
these conditions of institutional duality institutional forces that originate in two
separate sectors can create a state of institutional contradiction.
One criticism of DiMaggio and Powell is that their emphasis on conformity to
institutional norms and the search for legitimacy in an organisational field is that it
cannot explain institutional change. However, as Seo and Creed (2002) argue
institutional contradiction can itself be a source of change. They claim that
institutional contradictions in combination with human agency can initiate
institutional change.
An organisational field is a meso level relational and contextual concept that sits
analytically between the macro level of the institutional environment of furtherhigher
education and the micro level of actual organisational practice. An
organisational field only exists to the extent that it has become institutionalised.
The concept helps move away from dualistic accounts of further-higher education
that view FE and HE as discrete categories. It highlights a constant process of
organising and re-configuration at the interface. This does not preclude the
existence of dual institutional environments operating within the context of one
organisational field nor the contested nature of field level processes in furtherhigher
education.
From a neo-institutionalist perspective the organisational field is a set of meanings
and a system of classification. The likelihood of a convergence to one set of
meanings rooted in separate FE and HE sectors identities at the further-higher
interface and under conditions of institutional duality is disputed. What is more 
74
likely is that a process of hybridisation and adaptation conflicting institutional
pressures will emerge.
Conceptualising the organisational field as a set of practices and a system of
institutionalised classification requires an analytical framework that can incorporate
institutional duality. The diverse understandings of practitioners, policy makers and
academic contributions within an organisational field can then be accommodated
as part of the ‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education.
This literature review has explored the policy, practitioner and academic literature
with the view of synthesising existing sources. It has shown that there are
significant gaps in the existing materials for developing a conceptual understanding
of the dynamics and evolution of the further-higher interface. These silences may
indicate the stark reality of discrepancies in power, influence and status between
the HE dominated boundary organisations that largely determined policy in furtherhigher
education in the past.
What is needed is a conceptual vocabulary and an analytical framework that
situates the evolution of further-higher education in a wider political economy. The
aim should be to link the duality of the institutional environment of further-higher to
its organisational field, its systems of classification and the boundary work and
micro practices whereby policy becomes institutionalised and embedded as
practice. 
75
CHAPTER FOUR
A THEORETICAL CASE STUDY
“…..case studies, like experiments, are generalizable to theoretical
propositions and not to populations or universes. In this sense, the
case study, like the experiment, does not represent a “sample”, and
the investigator’s goal is to expand and generalize theories (analytic
generalization) and not to enumerate frequencies (statistical
generalization). ” (Yin, 1994, p 10)
This chapter provides the rationale for the choice of the theoretical case study as
the preferred methodology for developing a conceptual understanding of how the
further-higher education interface has evolved and has been configured over the
twenty year period under investigation. Drawing on the literature outlined in the
previous chapter it synthesises existing knowledge and extracts from it a
conceptual vocabulary and theoretical insights that can be used to build an
analytical understanding of the boundary work that takes place at the further-higher
interface.
Shifting configurations at the English further-higher interface over a twenty year
period reflect changes in the balance of power, status and reputation among
university based HE providers and non university based further-higher education
organisations. This case study links context to process at the further-higher
interface. It explores the evolution and dynamics of the interface relationally and
holistically and as part of a wider political economy of further-higher education. It is
argued that in situations in which it is difficult to separate context from process a 
76
theoretical case study is an appropriate choice of method. When little theoretical
and analytical work exists on a phenomenon, a theoretical case study helps
explore its complexities and can generate new concepts and theories.
Theoretically and conceptually further-higher education is not well understood. It
lacks an underpinning body of conceptually informed literature on further-higher
education and a substantive and cumulative body of theory that can be used to
analyse it. The scattered and largely descriptive practitioner ‘grey’ and policy
literature described in the previous chapter do not currently provide an adequate
theoretical infrastructure to achieve this aim. Preliminary efforts to collect existing
material are at an embryonic stage and for that reason a range of inter-disciplinary
academic sources including that drawn from organisational and institutional theory
has been filtered to construct a conceptual vocabulary that can act as a scaffold for
developing an analytical and theoretically led case study.
Following Yin (1984, 1989, 1993, 1994) it is argued that the case study method is
particularly suited to situations in which the researcher has little control over events
or in which relatively little is known about the phenomenon under investigation. In
situations where it is not possible to easily separate the boundaries of the
phenomenon under investigation from the case being explored then it is a
particularly suitable methodological approach. Further-higher education represents
just such a situation.
Conceptualising how the further-higher interface, the institutional, sector and interorganisational
boundaries that define its contours have blurred and undergone 
77
significant reconfigurations over the twenty years since 1988 is therefore a priority.
The boundary work that has taken place at the further-higher interface is suitable
for investigation because of the difficulties of defining a distinct further-higher
education sector that can be separated from its FE and HE roots. It is an emergent
and evolving interface and the role of boundaries and sector legacies in its
evolution are not clear cut. In some cases boundaries may perform a positive
function in enabling student transitions between FE and HE. In others they may act
as a barrier or serve to reproduce and institutionalise internal distinctions within the
organisational structure of further-higher education providers.
The boundary of the case, which in this instance is the further-higher interface, is
blurred and difficult to separate from its context. The transactions and exchanges
that take place across the interface are embedded and institutionalised in complex
relationships involving crossing sectors, institutional and organisational divides that
are rooted in the two separate FE and HE sector identities and legacies.
Disentangling these processes requires a holistic methodological approach that
can capture the complexities and dynamics of the interface. Identifying conceptual
tools that enable the construction of an analytical framework that can help
conceptualise the processes of institutionalisation taking place at the interface is
the goal of the thesis. In developing these tools theory may inform policy
implementation or help clarify the processes whereby policy becomes implemented
and embedded as practice.
The three literature streams outlined in the previous chapter (the policy,
practitioner and academic literatures) were interrogated and synthesised with this 
78
in mind. Within a neo-institutionalist framework the literature is placed in an
analytical framework that is explored in greater detail in Part Two of the thesis.
Here it should be pointed out that the central role of institutions is paramount in this
analysis. The further-higher education institutional environment, its associated
institutional arrangements, their impact on sector and organisational boundaries
through the boundary work that takes place at the further-higher interface cannot
be understood in isolation from a wider political economy. The outcome of the
processes of institutionalisation at the further-higher interface, whereby formal
policy becomes embedded as organisational practice ‘on the ground’, is theorised
through the analytical framework that emerges from the case study. It is a process
that must be understood in context and theorised in terms of the iteration of context
and process.
As a theoretical case study, the thesis conceptualises the connections between the
macro levels of the institutional environment, the meso level of the further-higher
organisational field and the micro level of organisational practice, as a constant
process of organising and reconfiguring the further-higher interface. Because it is
primarily a conceptual approach the theoretical case study method acts as a
heuristic device for generating new theory and concepts from the existing scattered
literature on further-higher education that was outlined earlier.
Understanding the processes whereby the configuration of the further-higher
interface unfolded over this time period and the context in which transactions and
exchanges take place across and within organisational and sector boundaries is
complex. Not only is the maturation of the further-higher education organisational 
79
field an integral part of the development of the university based HE organisational
field, but transactions and exchanges across the further-higher interface are often
asymmetrical and constantly evolving while being occasionally contested. Furtherhigher
education thus cannot be understood except as a relational construct rather
than a dichotomy based on distinctions between FE and HE. A holistic and
contextual analysis is needed to help understand this relation of process to context
and structure to action.
Boundary work at the further-higher interface is surrounded by ambiguity, involves
multiple interests and different stakeholders with different goals and interests while
the causal processes linking the iteration of context to process is not well
understood. Untangling this complexity theoretically is particularly well suited to
using a theoretical case study methodology as the tool of investigation.
Rittel (1973) refers to situations in which there appear to be no simple solutions to
understanding complex problems analogous to those found at the further-higher
interface as ‘wicked problems’. Further-higher education is an example of a
‘wicked problem’ inasmuch as it exhibits complexity, ambiguous and sometimes
contested values and goals. Its fundamental institutional duality makes it difficult to
understand causal processes or identify simple solutions to complex problems
because of the co-existence of distinct institutional logics within the same
organisational field. With ‘wicked problems’, it is the very complexity of the situation
that makes it difficult to isolate causal mechanisms. Exploration of such complexity
is inevitably provisional lacking a conceptual vocabulary or developed theoretical
framework for understanding it. 
80
The case under investigation and the institutional and organisational transitions
that have taken place are bounded by time, location and sector and by four
significant events, institutional or policy turns. At theoretically significant points in
these institutional and organisational transformations the further-higher interface
was re-configured, re-contextualised and re-classified. The transactions and
exchanges that took place at the interface were embedded in institutional and
social relations as well as relations of economic exchange that are intrinsically
integrated within a wider political economy.
The units of analysis of this case are the embedded transactions and exchanges
that take place at the further-higher interface. They are reconstructed through a
focus on the policy, practitioner and academic literature outlined in the previous
chapter. These transactions exhibit structural attributes that define the transaction
as bilateral relations of dependence between legally autonomous FE and HE
organisations. They constitute a type of exchange across the further-higher
interface that is often asymmetrical. Differences in power, access to resources and
status are evident and the legitimacy of different modes of provision is sometimes
contested. Understanding and conceptualising these exchanges involves
contextualising them against this interplay of multiple actors, agencies and
structural contexts.
Investigating the context in which these transactions and exchanges are
embedded in detail contributes to establishing a conceptual understanding of the
institutional environment and the institutional arrangements (or governance 
81
structures) that mediate the ‘rules of the game’ whereby transactions and
exchanges are institutionalised and configured at the further-higher interface.
Whether the transitions that occur are permanent or transitory and the
organisational forms found in further-higher education are transitional or
permanent is one of the questions explored throughout this case study.
The case study methodology allows a detailed theoretical investigation of the
iterative processes whereby transactions and exchanges at the further-higher
interface and the context in which they take place can be understood conceptually.
Theoretical insights can then be drawn through a focus on detailed analysis of a
single case. It is not the aim of this preliminary theoretical exploration of the
dynamics of the further-higher interface to make statistical generalisations about
the representativeness of the case at this stage. Its purpose is to engage in
analytical generalisation rather than to generalise in terms of statistical frequencies
or sampling and to generate a conceptual vocabulary and theoretical
understanding of the interface. Analytical generalisation is theory led and the
criterion for evaluating its effectiveness is its theoretical relevance rather than the
statistical frequency with which an event occurs.
The author’s own experience of working in a large college of further and higher
education over a period of some twenty years complemented the policy,
practitioner and academic literature used to construct this theoretical case study.
However, this is not a study of any one provider: nor is it ethnography. It
investigates and attempts to theorise the interplay of the further-higher institutional
environment, the development of the further-higher interface and the organisational 
82
practices of further-higher education providers from secondary sources using
multiple sources of evidence. In this under theorised and poorly understood area
there is little in the way of a pre-existing conceptual foundation for building theory:
hence the use of a theoretical case study methodology as a tool for preliminary
investigation.
Defining the Case
Stake (1994) describes different types of case study two of which are the intrinsic
case study and the instrumental case study. The research in the thesis consists of
both. It is intrinsic because the author was employed at a large further-higher
education provider which made it intrinsic to individual experience. It provided an
impetus to understand and conceptualise the constant changes that had been
experienced over a period of almost twenty years. It is instrumental because it
aims to answer the question of how a conceptual understanding of further-higher
education provision can contribute to a wider theoretical understanding of furtherhigher
education.
The key characteristic of the theoretical case study and an important element that
distinguishes it from ethnography is that it is purposively theory driven and
designed to elaborate future conceptual development. Yin provides one of the
most thorough and systematic accounts of the case study method emphasising the
theory driven nature of the case study. Other prominent theorists include Eckstein
(1975), Stake (1995) and Merriam (1988) whose contribution to the study of the
case study methodology will be considered below. 
83
Yin defines the case study as:
“an empirical inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon
within its real-life context; especially when the boundaries between
the phenomenon and context are not clearly evident.” (Yin, 1994, p
13)
This investigation, however, is not based on an empirical case study but a
theoretical one informed by existing secondary sources and the need to develop
theoretical propositions where few currently exist. A theoretical case study such as
this uses the case, in this instance the exchanges taking place across the English
further-higher interface, as a laboratory for generating potential novel or new
concepts. These can contribute to building a conceptual vocabulary and analytical
framework that facilitates the theorising of the interface, the exchanges taking
place there and the boundary work through which exchange becomes embedded
as practice.
In further-higher education, where few theoretical and conceptual accounts of its
development currently exist, the paucity of theoretical accounts of the dynamics of
the interface is a major drawback to informing policy interventions. For that reason
the synthesis and selective use of the policy, practitioner and academic literature
identified earlier, provides a starting point for developing more substantial theory.
The selection of the case and the unit of analysis are therefore choices that are
made in terms of how they can progress the development of a more extensive
theoretical understanding of the further-higher interface. This choice is inevitably 
84
highly selective given the complexities of the interdependencies between context
and the phenomenon under study. The process of case selection is informed by
theoretical priorities, disciplinary traditions and the research questions.
“The case study inquiry
copes with the technically distinctive situation in which there will be
many more variables of interest than data points, and as one result
relies on multiple sources of evidence, with data needing to converge
in a triangulating fashion, and as another result benefits from the
prior development of theoretical propositions to guide data gathering
and analysis.” (Yin, 1994, p 13)
Although often associated with qualitative research a case study may be
quantitative or a mix of qualitative and quantitative methods. A key feature of the
case study methodology is the use of multiple sources of evidence and of
triangulation to enhance the reliability and validity of a study. It is effectively a
strategy rather than one single method (Yin, 1994).
Case studies are consequently neither based upon pure empiricism nor on
excessive concentration on details which limits the ability to generalise from case
to theory. Some of the most common criticisms made against case studies are that
it is hard to generalise from cases, that they are difficult to replicate and that they
are subjective or ‘unscientific’. It is argued that in situations where theoretical
knowledge is undeveloped and largely unexplored a theoretical case study is
useful for generating new, novel insights that attempt to move beyond existing
knowledge. Where that takes research cannot be known in advance and therefore 
85
theoretical case studies should be designed to provoke new insights rather than
test existing ones.
The case is selected on theoretical grounds to illuminate or illustrate a relatively
unknown phenomenon. In this sense it is exploratory. In this study, the choice of
the case study is a preliminary attempt to develop theory in a relatively under
theorised area. Its primary function is as a heuristic device that can extend existing
knowledge beyond its current frontiers.
Given that the case study approach adopted here is an example of theoretical or
purposive sampling rather than statistical sampling the selection of the case needs
justifying. The further-higher interface is the locus or intersection of two distinct
sectors with different traditions, identities cultures and histories. The transactions
and exchanges that take place across this interface are embedded in an
institutional environment and an organisational field that is characterised by
institutional duality. The case study methodology allows the exploration of the
iteration of process and context at this interface and especially those tensions,
paradoxes and anomalies that can be the result of this duality. As a theoretical
case study the selection of the case and the unit of analysis have been selected for
the theoretical insights it can provide in illuminating the dynamics of this furtherhigher
interface. As an example of theoretical sampling the choice of the furtherhigher
interface as its locus of investigation provides the foundations of the
theoretical case study methodology adopted here 
86
Moreover, in terms of the capacity to generalise from the findings of the case study
the ability to generalise is an example of analytic generalization and not statistical
generalisation (Hamel et al, 1993, p44). It is not about the frequency with which a
case occurs as in statistical sampling, but about the theoretical relevance and
consequent methodological significance of the case in informing theory
development.
Arguing for rigorous and systematic approaches to research design in advance of
data collection, Yin (1994) proposes that issues surrounding the validity, reliability
and the ability to generalise from individual case studies need to be dealt with in
terms of the appropriateness of the case study for aiding the investigation of
theoretically undeveloped areas.
In terms of reliability, validity and generalisability the case study method does not
meet a positivist understanding of what these measures mean. If by reliability what
is meant is the ability to reproduce the case under investigation at a separate point
in time that is plainly not possible given that the events are possibly unique. Nor
does the researcher have much if any control over events in the way an
experimental researcher would have. Reliability in terms of a theoretical case study
resides in how relevant the case study is to the research questions being asked
and the theory being developed and the further development of theory and
concepts. One way of enhancing reliability is to make comparisons with analogous
circumstances: for example, reforms in the public sector that witnessed the
introduction of NPM and managerialism and the blurring of the public and private
divide show similarities to the reforms that took place under incorporation. The 
87
interface of public and private under conditions of institutional and organisational
transformation in the public sector can illuminate similar processes at the furtherhigher
interface.
In terms of measures of validity is what is claimed to be measured actually being
measured? To answer this question there needs to be a focus on the literature that
is available as data informing theory construction. The study draws on the policy,
practitioner and inter-disciplinary academic literature to construct its theoretical
propositions. This is not a comprehensive set of sources in terms of offering a
theoretical foundation for conceptualising the further-higher interface and there are
inevitably gaps. Validity, therefore, is not simply an objective construct but a
question of the theoretical relevance of the literature used based on theoretical
sampling and analytical generalisations that emerge from the materials.
The ability to generalise from the case study is also limited. However, as the aim of
the research is to generate a conceptual vocabulary and theoretical propositions
from the literature this is not a significant limitation. Its priority is to construct an
analytical framework that can be used to make sense of the interface.
Eckstein (1975) describes a heuristic-case study as distinct from other variants of
the case study method and through it theory may emerge in the process of ‘finding
out’ and unpicking raw data. The detailed investigation of an individual case can
reveal underlying principles embedded in the data that can contribute to the future
development of further theory in Eckstein’s view. In this sense the case study is
neither testing an existing theory nor is it purely descriptive. 
88
The choice of a theoretical case study to explore the further-higher interface and
the organisational forms found in there is one that was made in circumstances that
during the course of the study saw significant and unexpected events taking place.
For example, the power to grant foundation degree awarding powers to furtherhigher
providers in 2008 was one instance. This is typically the sort of terrain in
which a case study is most useful as Yin (1994) argued when the case and the
phenomenon cannot be easily separated and events cannot easily be controlled.
With little control over events and given the difficulties in identifying the boundaries
between the case and context at the further-higher interface the policy context and
the processes whereby policy is institutionalised as practice would require more
detailed ethnographic techniques to advance understanding. This was not the
method adopted here. The focus of analysis was on the policy literature and
practitioner literature and was illuminated through a theoretical consideration of the
academic literature on the role of institutions and institutionalisation in
organisational change. This was then applied to the analysis of inter-organisational
collaboration in further-higher provision across sector and institutional divides.
Thus a theoretical exploration of the processes of institutionalisation and deinstitutionalisation,
the configuration and re-configurations of the further-higher
interface was undertaken as a means of developing an analytical and conceptual
framework. The section below investigates the arguments for and against this
particular methodological approach. 
89
The Analytical Framework
Case studies may frequently use multiple methods of data collection and evidence.
In the context in which they are used here they are distinct from ethnography and
other methodological approaches because they may attempt some approximation
to testing prior theories or hypotheses and follow a distinct logic of discovery
similar to those procedures typically found in the experimental method (Yin, 1993,
p46). These are preliminary theoretical propositions, hypothesis or formulated
hunches to be tested in advance of collecting data and evidence. As Eckstein
claims, the use of a heuristic-case can help the emergence of theoretical
propositions and vocabularies that may contribute to the future development of
theory. They are not in a literal sense testing existing developed theories. Their
purpose is to generate new ones.
In practice, it was impossible to begin theorising the further-higher interface and its
associated organisational forms without some preconceptions of its characteristics
in advance. Most significantly, the institutional duality of further-higher education
with HE sector bodies tending to oversee quality and funding issues while furtherhigher
providers are responsible for their infrastructure to FE sector bodies can
create tensions. The case study method can usefully aid the exploration of these
tensions in a way that other methodologies cannot by situating them in the context
of a broader system of classification that operates under dual institutional logics.
The anomalies that result from this duality can then be contextualised. 
90
By definition anomalies do not fit. As part of this initiative to construct an analytical
framework to further conceptual understanding of the further-higher interface a
neo-institutionalist analysis of the role of anomaly based on the work of Douglas
(1966) was used. This formed part of the analytical framework that emerged from
the data. The basic idea behind Douglas’ work which is usually referred to as gridgroup
analysis was to investigate how systems of classification in human societies
maintained boundaries and what happened when boundaries were transgressed in
the context of that system of classification. This is explored in detail in more part
two of the thesis. Here it should be pointed out that Douglas’ essentially neoinstitutionalist
analysis of how classification systems maintain or threaten
boundaries can equally well be applied to the categories and boundaries that
demarcate FE and HE. Grenstad and Per Selle (1995), for example, argued that
Douglas’ approach bears similarities to a neo-institutionalist analysis.
Applying Douglas’ grid-group analysis to further-higher education, as part of a
system of classification of post-compulsory education that now included university
based HE and non-university based further-higher provision, the latter could be
considered an example of ‘matter out of place’. It did not fit into the traditional
system of classification of HE and was not accepted by all as a legitimate mode of
HE provision (Parry, 2008). Douglas’ grid-group framework is therefore used as a
heuristic device to explore the nature of anomaly in this context. A theoretical case
study is useful in teasing out the anomalies and paradoxes found at the furtherhigher
interface through its emphasis on the iteration of context and process and
its focussed analysis on a single case. Douglas’ insights allow the reader to
conceptualise the sometimes anomalous and paradoxical situations found at the 
91
further-higher interface contextually as part of a wider system of classification that
reflects existing structures and the institutional duality of further-higher education.
The Research Questions
A preliminary discussion of the conceptual framework adopted and derived from
the literature review informed the construction of the research questions and
helped formulate the choice of the unit of analysis for the case study in advance of
data collection and analysis. This is discussed in this section.
The case is focussed upon English further-higher education and circumscribed by
the configuration of the further-higher interface at different points in time and at
theoretically significant institutional turns. Further-higher providers operate in an
institutional environment and through configurations of institutional arrangements
that are variously described as ‘markets’, quasi-markets or semi-compulsory
collaborative partnerships. There is an inevitable tension between competitive and
collaborative modes of operating and the governance structures that oversee
operations. These dynamics are investigated through the exploration of a single
case bounded in time, place and by sector.
The selection of appropriate units of analysis for the case study was based on
theoretical sampling rather than on a probability sample. Considering transactions
and exchanges at the further-higher interface to constitute the unit of analysis is
therefore a theoretical choice. At each institutional turn over the twenty year period
the transactions and exchanges taking place saw a reconfiguration of the further-
92
higher interface. The boundaries between FE and HE were reconfigured but
unevenly. Researching this process was highly exploratory.
The research questions initially outlined in the introduction are reproduced here;
both as a reminder of their scope and to underline their theoretical dimensions:
• How can English further-higher education provision be
conceptualised as a component of a wider system of mass HE?
• To what extent has the reconfiguration of the further-higher
interface in the last twenty years resulted in the institutionalisation of new
‘rules of the game’ or the persistence of institutional duality and parallel
systems of regulation in further-higher education?
• How can the boundary work that takes place at the further-higher
interface and the changing roles and functions of boundary organisations
that sit at the interface be conceptualised and contextualised in furtherhigher
education?
• Are the institutional and organisational changes that are and have
taken place at the further-higher interface over the last a permanent or
transitory phenomenon?
• Does the increasing diversity of further-higher education enhance
widening participation or re-enforce relative structured social inequalities?
• How can the historical shifts in terminological conventions, systems
of classification and data gathering techniques in further-higher education
be conceptualised and integrated into one analytical framework? 
93
Other questions evolved in the course of the thesis and contributed to the
development of an emergent conceptual framework. These included the following:
• Is the hybridisation of organisational forms that have emerged at
the further-higher interface a solution to the problem of dealing with
competing and sometimes conflicting external institutional pressures in
further-higher education?
• How can the paradoxes and anomalies that are found at the
further-higher interface be conceptualised and investigated?
• Does institutional duality of further-higher education lead to a stable
or unstable system of provision?
• Does the boundary work that takes place at the further-higher
interface create boundaries that are barriers or facilitators of progression
between FE and HE?
These additional research questions evolved as the researcher became more
familiar with the literature and drew on other disciplinary traditions to conceptualise
the further-higher interface. Linking the emergent conceptual framework to the
research questions helped determine the methodological and analytical strategy
that would evolve. Research is itself a process whereby progress is made through
building on previous theory. Where little prior research existed it is therefore highly
exploratory and provisional.
Furthermore, as Hamel et al (1993) claim case studies allow the exploration of the
local in the global. What they mean by this is that a detailed and focussed analysis 
94
of a particular case can reveal new insights into how macro processes impact on
the micro.
The processes of marketisation, the rise of ‘academic capitalism’ (Slaughter and
Leslie, 1997) and the commodification of further-higher education and HE are
global phenomena. The accompanying institutional, sector and organisational
changes, the spread of neo-liberalism and the introduction of private sector
practices through NPM reforms and managerialism are, however, institutionalised
within individual organisational structures and forms. These macro level processes
impact differently on local situations and institutions and on the configuration of the
further-higher interface and structuration of its organisational field. The case study
method allows the exploration of these global local linkages.
“The movement from local to global is determined by identifying
singularities and understood in the sense used in mathematics and
scientific epistemology” (Hamel et al, 1993, p36).
What is meant by this is that the macroscopic is embedded in the microscopic and
that the case can illustrate the workings of the wider social system and the
principles underlying it through in-depth analysis. Investigation can generate
analytical purchase and findings generated through the analysis of single cases in
detail contribute to the development of a conceptual toolkit in under explored and
poorly understood areas.
In further-higher education a detailed description of a series of transitional events,
incorporation in 1988 and 1992, Dearing in 1997 and the establishment of the LSC
in 2001, have been analysed in order to develop conceptual insights. Although 
95
analysis of these events are not based upon an ethnographic approach but on
policy documents, practitioner accounts and other academic literature, a detailed
emphasis on these events can help untangle context from process and illustrate
broader processes of institutionalisation. As one theoretical case study or as one
of several case studies they may contribute to revealing the structural principles
underpinning the political economy of further-higher education and its relation to
HE as part of the wider economy and the process of institutionalisation.
The analysis of the case in detail and of institutional transformation at these points
in time therefore can yield an understanding which can generate analytic insights
to further understanding and to aid generalisation beyond the individual case. In
further-higher education, the four institutional turns identified earlier help illustrate
the underlying dynamics of the boundary work and boundary setting mechanisms
at work at its interface.
The Case Study Method: A Critique
Through focussing in depth on one intensive case of a phenomenon the case
study methodology contributes to uncovering how significant contextual and policy
histories in further-higher education may be theorised. For this reason context and
holism are important in case studies.
They are particularly useful for exploring new or unfamiliar research topics of which
little is known. They can help generate hypotheses or direct researchers into
avenues of future research based upon the uncovering of hitherto unknown 
96
phenomenon or relations. The case study method acts as a sensitivising device for
uncovering theoretically significant propositions, novel findings and new concepts.
This approach through which concepts emerge from data is particularly suited to
qualitative research but is not exclusive to it. Quantitatively based case studies can
generate new concepts informed by the exploratory and investigative nature of the
case study.
The epistemological assumptions underpinning the qualitative case study are that
the social world is constituted through meaning and interpretation and
consequently the adoption of a methodology should be contingent on its ability to
contribute to the subjective understanding of a naturalistic world. This should
incorporate the investigation of tacit, hidden meanings and the informal
organisation which underpins formal organisation. This is important when the
unintended consequences of policy initiatives are studied as well as the intended.
This research represents a preliminary investigation of the written sources
available and hence does not address these issues as such. However, a future
investigation that builds on this analysis would need to investigate how public
policy is implemented as practice. The various codes of practice, consultations and
other policy literature on further-higher education are not simply public texts: they
have to be interpreted.
The preferences and dispositions of organisational actors in further-higher
education are, from this particular stance, an example of the negotiated outcome of
an iterative process through which the macro, meso and micro structural
dimensions of the workings of the further-higher interface are played out and 
97
become embedded as institutionalised practice. How does the process of
institutionalisation and de-institutionalisation, embedding and dis-embedding of
practices, and the configuration and reconfiguration of organisational forms at the
further-higher interface evolve? The case study method helps tease out this
dynamic.
The classification of further-higher education at the FE and HE interface is
problematic because of changes of terminology during the twenty years under
investigation. An example is the shifting categorisation of prescribed HE and nonprescribed
HE which at various stages over the twenty year period covered here
have been redefined and re-configured. Some provision at one stage came under
the oversight of FE funding bodies and at another HE sector bodies. This anomaly
remains in place. What is particularly useful in this instance of the use of the case
study methodology is that it allows the study of anomaly and paradox against
context and over a sustained period of time.
All methodological approaches are based upon ontological and epistemological
assumptions about the nature of the social ‘reality’ being studied and upon
practical and political considerations. Given that this thesis is partly about new
emergent or hybrid organisational forms both formal elements and informal
elements of institutional life and the interaction between them need to be covered
in any analysis. Multiple social realities and institutional logics coexist and
occasionally conflict. The institutional duality of further-higher education in itself
inevitably creates some tensions and these would need to be incorporated into any
analysis. Policy texts should be read with this in mind. 
98
Case studies can be classified by purpose. They may be descriptive,
explanatory/exploratory or evaluative. The research reported here is aimed at
being a theoretical exploration, although there are elements of description and
evaluation involved. Untangling the normative and descriptive elements of an
analysis of further-higher education from the conceptual and theoretical has been
the purpose of this theoretical case study.
Yin (1994) argues theoretical selection of some sort is always involved in a well
designed case study and this will be linked to the purpose of the research. In
exploratory case studies there is a systematic search for emergent patterns or
configurations. If configurationally distinct patterns are associated together then it
is claimed they are related but not necessarily causally connected. In
circumstances in which ‘wicked problems’ prevail then it is unlikely that these
causal connections are easily identified or that they are easy to operationalise.
‘Wicked problems’ are characterised by complexity, ambiguity and anomaly.
Yet case studies may reveal trends that are not obvious or prominent on the policy
radar but in the case of organisational and institutional transitions at the furtherhigher
interface may be taking place beneath the surface or at the margins of the
phenomenon under investigation. They may illuminate underlying structural
principles of social systems in operation. Much of this study features inter-sector
change and the analysis of patterns of competition and collaboration that often coexist
in tension. 
99
A heurist case study is useful for early investigations in which a common research
trajectory is not clearly set out within an established academic disciplinary tradition.
The case study can serve heuristic purposes enhancing meaning and providing
new insights while generating a conceptual vocabulary and toolkit. This can
contribute to the development of an inter-disciplinary analytical model that in this
instance draws upon a neo-institutionalist reading of organisational change in
further-higher education.
However, the case study methodology has had numerous critics. Often this is
because the term has been used so loosely as to mean most things to most
people. As mentioned above the term refers to a process and a strategy for
uncovering theoretical and conceptual insights rather than a method in itself. If this
definition is adopted as it is here then what characterises the strategy and what are
its strengths and weaknesses?
A major criticism of the case study is its lack of generality. Yet as mentioned earlier
the case study is based upon theoretical sampling rather than statistical sampling
from a sample to a population. Moreover, pragmatic factors such as access and
the sensitivity of a topic may determine what the universe of study is. You cannot
easily identify a population or sampling frame in advance especially if the object of
study is sensitive or deliberately elusive to outside investigation. This is also a
useful approach if the case being investigated involves changes that are occurring
at the margins or boundaries of inter-organisational collaborative processes that
are not widely known or understood because they are relatively new. The
interstitial emergence of new organisational forms in further-higher education is an 
100
example. Informal organisation within formal organisations is another area in which
the case study may be an appropriate method because it allows the teasing out of
the interaction between formal and informal aspects of institutionalisation that
might be missed by other methods.
The interaction between formal and informal aspects of institutional behaviour is
significant and modelling this type of behaviour in particular requires a
methodological approach which allows cross checking of behaviour against
context. This is equally the case in modelling strategic or micro political behaviour
as bounded rational or opportunistic behaviour in or between organisations. While
this thesis is not an empirical case study as such the informal ‘ecologies of
practice’ (Stronach, 2002) investigated in the course of the analysis is suggestive
of areas for future research that could benefit from a more empirically focused and
ethnographic approach that are sensitive to informal organisation.
However, this theoretical case study is an attempt to synthesise the policy
literature and a range of evidence and data on the workings of further-higher
education within one analytical framework. Prior conceptual categories, either tacit
or explicit, will inevitably become guides to frame further research and to direct the
development of theory through an iterative process with the data. It is the
conceptual framework and research questions which largely determine the
methodology of any piece of research. The research questions outlined above
clearly focus on the boundary work that takes place at the further-higher interface
and how that can be conceptualised as an iteration of context and process. 
101
The methodological basis of the case study research is often criticised on account
of its validity and reliability. In terms of validity, by which is meant the extent to
which that which is being measured accurately reflects the theoretical ‘object’ of
the study and that it reflects the literature available rather than any definitive
measure of the objective property of the further-higher interface. In terms of its
reliability it is constrained by the mix of policy, practitioner and academic sources
drawn on and the degree to which they are publicly available. Moreover, as a
representative account of the workings of the further-higher interface, it is highly
provisional.
The case study typically uses multiple sources of evidence (Stake, 1995). For the
purpose of this study these sources have largely been restricted to the policy
literature, the ‘grey literature’ and practitioner literature and the academic literature.
The author’s own experience of delivering further-higher education in a large
college provider over fifteen years and of interacting with various universities both
old and new inevitably influenced how this data was interpreted.
There were few existing theoretical investigations of further-higher education
available at the time of writing. Nor was there an established disciplinary tradition
or an academic ‘field’ dedicated to the theoretical development of existing studies.
The case study helped generate concepts and an analytical framework built on a
neo-institutionalist foundation to partly address this.
Data that was being generated by fieldworkers and scholars that were involved in
the FurtherHigher project at the University of Sheffield was also made available to 
102
the author and contributed to the development of some of the ideas that emerged
from the thesis. Two visits to further-higher providers that were involved in the
project were also made by the author. In combination, these sources provide the
data and intelligence through which theory could be generated.
Conclusion
The theoretical case study methodology adopted in this thesis was chosen as the
most appropriate research method for investigating the evolution of the furtherhigher
interface over time in order to capture the iteration of process against
context in circumstances in which the boundaries of the case and the phenomenon
under investigation are not clear and the researcher had little control over events.
The constant processes of organising and disorganising at the boundaries of the
further-higher interface and across inter-organisational divides was analysed in the
context in which it took place and against the background of the historical legacies
from which it has developed. A number of institutional turns were identified as
having particular theoretical significance for investigating the case. The processes
of institutionalisation within the further-higher organisational field underwent a
fundamental reconfiguration and reclassification at each of these turning points.
The case study was built around an analytical framework that emerged from the
literature review that was used to conceptualise the ongoing processes of
institutional transformation in detail and in context. 
103
Although most case studies do not begin without at least some initial sensitivising
preconceptions these are often tacit rather than explicit at the beginning of a study.
Indeed, this case study did not set out to test an existing theory, not least because
of the paucity of existing theoretical accounts of the development of further-higher
education. It looked to the emergence of theory from a scattered body of existing
literatures and a range of disciplinary traditions. During the course of the study a
neo-institutionalist reading of contributions from organisational theory was found to
be most useful in capturing the dynamics of boundary work at the further-higher
interface and the context in which it occurred. The institutionalisation of an
emerging further-higher organisational field was conceptualised through this
framework.
A theoretical case study is useful in helping build the theoretical underpinnings of a
topic usually in its early stage of analysis when a developed corpus of theory does
not yet exist. This is the situation that was presented in further-higher education.
There are few accounts that are theoretically informed that can assist policy
implementation. Part Two of the thesis offers a theoretically informed political
economy and neo-institutionalist analysis of further-higher education over a twenty
year period. 
PART TWO 
104
CHAPTER FIVE
A POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ENGLISH FURTHER HIGHER
EDUCATION
This chapter provides an overview of the theoretical and conceptual content
contained in part two of this thesis. It is premised upon a neo-institutionalist
analysis of institutional and organisational change at the English further-higher
interface. It situates the further-higher education interface in its broader sociopolitical
institutional and organisational context while examining the processes of
hybridisation and boundary work taking place at the interface.
The chapter functions as a prelude to the more detailed exploration of the
analytical framework developed in part Two. The chapter sets the scene for the
construction of an analytical framework that draws on a range of inter-disciplinary
sources. This is then covered in detail in the following three chapters. In the past
the fragmented nature of much of the work that has been done on further-higher
education has lacked a strong disciplinary underpinning and tradition that can be
used to advance theoretical understanding of its interface.
Firstly, the analytical underpinnings of the research are outlined. The conceptual
foundations of the analytical model are introduced while a distinction is made
between variants of old and new institutionalist theory. Different conceptual 
105
understandings of what an institution is are discussed. This is contextualised as
part of a wider political economy of further-higher education in which an
institutionalist analysis of further-higher education is constructed. The sociopolitical,
cultural and economic contexts in which institutional and organisational
change at the further-higher interface has taken place over the two decades
following incorporation is then considered.
To begin with, an analytical framework based upon a sociological institutionalist
reading of the evolution of the English further-higher education landscape is
developed. This investigates the transactions, exchanges and boundary work
taking place at the further-higher interface conceptually. It explores those
institutional contextual factors that contribute to the configuration and classification
of the further-higher interface. It conceptualises the context and processes of
institutionalisation within the further-higher organisational field, its stages of
evolution and the mechanisms whereby the field has evolved.
Further-higher education is first considered as an institutionalised system of
categorisation and classification. A neo-institutionalist reading of the work of
Douglas on comparative systems of classification is utilised to conceptualise the
categorisation and classification of further-higher education. The grid-group
analysis derived from Douglas’ early work is applied to understanding the furtherhigher
interface as a distinct mode of delivery. Particular attention is paid to its
hybrid nature and to processes of hybridisation taking place at the further-higher
interface. Understanding the structural basis of anomaly and paradox within 
106
further-higher education considered as a system of classification is progressed
through the use of the grid-group heuristic.
Next the exchanges that take place across sector and organisational divides are
conceptualised sociologically in terms of the embeddedness of transactions in
wider institutional contexts. Specific configurations of social relations, sector
legacies and identities are identified through the use of a modified version of
transaction cost economics. A range of inter-disciplinary sources are also drawn
upon to complement transaction cost analysis and to facilitate an understanding of
the iteration of economic and social factors at the further-higher interface.
The role and function of boundary organisations that mediate exchanges and sit at
the interface of the FE and HE sectors and further-higher education are theorised.
Both the boundary work and boundary objects that are produced by boundary
organisations are contextualised within this neo-institutionalist framework. Other
disciplinary traditions that explore the significance of boundary work, boundary
organisations and boundary objects including the sociological study of science and
technology and actor network theory have been drawn upon to illustrate the
dynamics of inter-sector and inter-organisational boundary work when the policy
and technical domains interact. In the instance of further-higher education FE and
HE are conceptualised as operating with two distinct institutional logics. Furtherhigher
education is conceptualised as a hybrid mixing elements of both and subject
to institutional duality and institutional contradictions at the further-higher interface. 
107
The chapter provides an overview of the underpinning foundations of the neoinstitutionalist
analysis adopted here and the associated vocabulary that is
developed throughout part Two. It sets the scene for a more detailed analysis of
the dynamics of the further-higher interface and the processes of hybridisation
taking place while the neo-institutionalist foundations on which it is built are made
explicit.
The institutional forces that configure the contemporary further-higher interface
emerged from the separate sectors and identities of FE and HE. This has given
rise to an institutional environment characterised by the co-existence of two distinct
institutional logics: one rooted in FE and the other in HE. Further-higher education
providers must routinely navigate this duality and the institutional contradictions
that emerge through their organisational practices and strategies. The dilemmas
and conflict that are produced have to be managed. The emergence of hybrid
organisational forms at the further-higher interface is arguably one response.
An analytical framework and associated vocabulary is constructed from those interdisciplinary
sources that were identified in part One of the thesis. These were used
to theorise the dynamics of exchanges and boundary work at the further-higher
interface. Contextualising boundary work at the further-higher interface and
theorising the role and function of boundary organisations in facilitating exchanges
is an important step in theorising the impact of institutional duality. The
effectiveness of policy implementation across inter-sector and inter-organisational
collaboration at the further-higher interface is better understood through an
analysis that incorporates contextual and processual factors within one analytical 
108
framework. This neither prioritises structure nor agency. Indeed, the iteration of
context and process at the further-higher interface is a constant and fluid
movement of organising. It cannot be conceptualised through static dichotomies or
dualities that contrast FE and HE as objective categories. Indeed, the institutional
contradictions associated with the institutional duality of further-higher education
not only are the source of tensions but in combination with individual agency
channel change.
In the past there has been a lack of a common conceptual vocabulary and
analytical tool kit rooted in an established academic disciplinary culture specifically
dealing with further-higher education. This presents researchers with a major
problem in trying to conceptualise how the interface can be theorised. This is
compounded by the lack of prior conceptual ground work to build upon. That which
does exist tends to be fragmented across disciplines. This chapter gives an
overview of the inter-disciplinary sources identified in the literature review and the
concepts that have been drawn from them and synthesises them.
An attempt is made to conceptualise the macro socio-political external environment
and meso and micro levels of analysis throughout. The institutional contradictions
that result from institutional duality are filtered through the further-higher
organisational field at the meso level and the organisational practices that are
embedded at the micro level as institutionalised formal and informal organisational
practice. 
109
Throughout the thesis there is an emphasis on how organisational strategies have
become embedded and institutionalised as practice. The processes and
mechanisms whereby the values, norms, and sector identities and loyalties
embedded in separate FE and HE sectors become institutionalised as hybrid
practices are considered in context. Further-higher education is an emergent and
socially constructed category: that is neither FE nor HE but a mix of both.
This mix of sector legacies, identities and institutional environments is
conceptualised relationally and holistically as one constant, fluid process of
organising, disorganising and hybridisation. Hybridisation as a process is analysed
as a coping mechanism for dealing with institutional contradictions and paradox at
the further-higher interface. The advantages and disadvantages of hybridity are
explored throughout the rest of part Two.
Further-Higher Education as an Instituted Process
As shown earlier a theoretical case study method was chosen to research the
context, dynamics and processes through which the institutionalisation of boundary
work takes place. A theoretical case study is particularly suited to circumstances
when the ‘case’ cannot easily be separated from the phenomenon in which it is
embedded and in which context and process are inter-twined. This section
considers the further-higher interface as the intersection of economic exchanges
as an instituted process across sector divides. It draws on Polanyi to conceptualise
and categorise the further-higher interface as a mix of economic exchanges
embedded in institutional contexts and sects of social relations and organisational
practices that are configured at the boundaries of FE and HE. 
110
The idea of the economy as an instituted process can be traced back to the
seminal work of (Polanyi, 1944). Polanyi argued that economic action could only
be understood in its substantive social and cultural contexts and that historically
the economy was increasingly dis-embedded from its social and cultural roots.
Here it is argued in a similar vein that further-higher education can only be
understood as part of a wider political economy that recognises the embeddedness
of economic action in its social, political, cultural, historical contexts.
Further-higher education is arguably neither FE nor HE but a hybrid. It is subject to
institutional contradiction and tensions at its interface that have to be managed. FE
and HE have been subject to increasing structural differentiation through different
funding, quality, governance mechanisms and differences in cultures (Scott, 2009).
The impact on further-higher education is unclear.
Different institutional logics, therefore, operate in different contexts and at different
times. Coping mechanisms and strategic responses to duality have evolved as a
response to these circumstances. Hybrid organisational forms offer a degree of
flexibility and adaptive potential to absorb these institutional tensions and
contradictions as well as a potential site for experimentation and innovation in
rapidly evolving institutional and organisational environments. The role and
functions of hybrid organisations is explored in detail in the following chapters.
Institutional and organisational change in further-higher education has witnessed a
constant process of embedding and dis-embedding of its interface into new 
111
configurations. The contextual institutional and organisational embeddedness of
further-higher education needs to be contextualised against this fluidity of change
and the tension between continuity and change.
The blurring of public and private distinctions between FE and HE sector after
incorporation has contributed to the process of hybridisation. External conditions of
institutional duality have to some extent become internalised in the diverse and
hybrid organisational forms found in further-higher education. Some of these
combine elements of both FE and HE within one organisational structure; others
separate out their FE and HE provision into different organisations. Garrod and
Mcfarlane (2007, 2009) for instance have investigated the emergence of
organisational forms at the English further-higher interface as well as other
countries with analogous systems. They have explored the emergence of duals
systems of delivery within one organisational structure and contrasted them to
binary modes of delivery in which FE and HE are kept separate by further-higher
providers. While most of these are at a relatively early stage of development and
evidence on how effective or otherwise they are in comparisons to alternative
modes of provision is not widely available their emergence has posed a number of
questions. For example how is the external institutional duality of further-higher
education dealt with within organisational forms that are almost by definition
collaborative inter-organisational and inter-sector arrangements?
According to Granovetter (1985) all economic action is embedded in social
relations. In further-higher education, the contextual embeddedness of the different
institutional logics that originated separately in FE and HE and the degree of 
112
embeddedness of social relations and economic and exchanges at the interface,
constitutes an analytically significant ‘laboratory’ through which the
institutionalisation of further-higher hybrid practices can be theorised.
The process of configuring economic exchanges and social relations at the furtherhigher
interface is simultaneously subject to convergent and divergent pressures.
The institutional duality of further-higher education, rooted in its historically
separate sector legacies, identities and systems of oversight, place conflicting
pressures on providers. This needs to be understood as an aspect of the
contextual embeddedness of FE and HE systems and their institutional duality.
The extent to which FE or HE structures, practices, processes and values have
been transferred across sector divides in further-higher education is the question.
A constant process of hybridisation that combines elements of FE and HE in
further-higher provision is one adaptive response to a lack of contextual fit.

Neither further-higher education nor HE can be considered in isolation as they are
functionally interdependent in pursuing a common aim of widening participation to
HE. It is this common purpose that has come to dominate the contemporary
discourse on the role and function of further-higher providers. The question is, how
in a differentiated and diversified system of HE provision, of which further-higher
education is a sub-ordinate part, can equity issues be aligned with increasing
diversity of provision?
The relation of non university further-higher education to university HE has to be
contextualised against this wider political economy and the ‘wicked problem’ of 
113
balancing equity and social justice issues within existing societal structures. This
means that conceptualising further-higher education involves understanding it as
part of one all encompassing contested organisational field of post-compulsory
education. In such an integrated system there are asymmetries of power,
influence, reputation and status at play across and within sectors. The transactions
and exchanges that are embedded in the organisational field and institutionalised
across the further-higher interface are therefore configured in a mix of relations of
dependencies and synergies and are asymmetrical in form.
A political economy of further-higher education would also have to address the
significance of the historical legacies and prior institutional configurations. Their
contextual embeddedness in the contemporary landscape of further-higher
education cannot be taken for granted. Such an approach would need to capture
those theoretically significant institutional and organisational transitions that have
taken place over the last twenty years as context, process and embedded
organisational practice.
Against the backdrop of increasing globalisation and global competition, the
economic role of further-higher education and its relationship to university based
HE has become an important mechanism for creating a competitive labour force
that can compete globally. As part of a drive to marketisation and massification
further-higher providers have also been given a higher profile in raising aspiration
and widening participation and access for non traditional students. The economic
drivers of further-higher education provision are located in these macro processes 
114
of globalisation, marketisation and massification. Further-higher education cannot
be understood except in that context.
At the same time an ideological shift towards NPM and managerialism over the last
twenty years and more has been evident in further-higher education. The influence
of these trends in further-higher education and the public sector more generally is
outlined in more detail in chapter Eight. Here it will merely be emphasised that the
political and ideational dimensions of reforms in further-higher education need to
be considered as part of wider trends in public sector reform.
The transactions and exchanges that take place between bounded groups or
organisations in further-higher education are configured through boundary work
and boundary organisations. The hybrid organisational forms found in furtherhigher
education are conceptualised as arrangements that function to absorb and
internalise the conflicting institutional pressures that are a consequence of the
institutional duality of further-higher education.
In order to construct this analytical framework a number of disciplines have been
trawled for relevant concepts and insights that can be applied to a theoretical
investigation of the dynamics of the further-higher education interface. An overview
of some of these contributions is given below. 
115
Theoretical Investigations
Contributions from a range of inter-disciplinary traditions have been synthesised in
an analytical framework designed to facilitate the conceptualisation and
theorisation of further-higher education. In particular work done on the relations
between organisations and their institutional environment and the nature of
boundaries and boundary work has been used. Boundary work is a process that
takes place in an institutionalised context mediated by boundary organisations that
contribute to the shaping of the further-higher interface and its organisational field.
NEO –INSTITUTIONALIST ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
(Core theoretical and epistemological underpinnings)
INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENTS (MACRO)
 INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
 GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES (MESO)
 ORGANISATIONAL FIELDS
ORGANISATIONAL PRACTICES (MICRO)
 (Strategies/positioning
 in organisational field)
Organisational Theory
New and Old
Institutionalism
Science and
Technology Studies
Actor Network Theory
Economic Sociology Further-Higher
Literature
POLITICAL ECONOMY OF FURTHER-HIGHER EDUCATION
(Macro-meso-micro Linkages)
Table 5.0
Contributions from organisational theory, the sociology of science and technology
studies, ANT and economic sociology are used to build a conceptual vocabulary
that informs this analytical framework. Table 5.0 illustrates the linkages between
inter-disciplinary traditions and the underpinning neo-institutionalist political
economy approach adopted in this research. 
116
Reading from the top to bottom of table 5 0 a neo-institutionalist analysis forms the
core underpinning of the analytical model, focussing on the relation of
organisations to their institutional environment and the interplay of institutional
forces externally and internally. The institutional environment of further-higher
education constitutes the macro level of analysis. The institutional arrangements or
governance structures that are embedded in the further-higher organisational field
represents the meso level. Finally the micro level of organisational practice and
strategy constitutes the micro level.
Organisational theory provides insights from studies of hybrid organisations and of
inter-organisational collaboration. More generally investigations into to the
relationship between organisations and their environment have been explored
using a range of disciplinary frameworks. The study of science and technology and
ANT offers useful analysis of the role of boundary processes and boundary objects
at sector and inter-organisational interfaces. Economic sociology provides insights
that can be applied to understanding the utility of the concept of embeddedness for
investigating exchanges and transactions at the further-higher interface. The
contextual embeddedness of organisational practices and institutional
environments cannot be assumed. Consequently policy implementation and
formulation cannot be understood in isolation from the institutional and
organisational contexts in which it takes place. These are situational factors that
have to be investigated empirically. However, the policy and practitioner literature
that was drawn from studies of further-higher policy and practitioner literature
provides the meat upon which the analysis has been built. 
117
In combination these inter-disciplinary contributions were applied to a model that
maps the landscape of further-higher education while capturing the dynamics of
boundary work and boundary exchanges as part of a dynamic and wider political
economy of further-higher provision. The interplay of the dual institutional
environments, institutional arrangements (or governance structures) that oversee
further-higher interface and its maturing further-higher organisational field is
highlighted throughout the analysis. The macro level processes originating in the
wider economy and institutional environment of further-higher education are filtered
through the meso level of the organisational field and are institutionalised at the
micro level as distinct organisational practices.
Within organisational theory alternative theoretical frameworks including resource
dependency theory, new economic institutionalism as well as neo-institutional
interpretations, have been explored for their contribution to understanding
institutional change in further-higher education. Each of these perspectives can be
used to consider the relationship between a further-higher education provider and
its environment in different ways and emphasises different facets of the
relationship between them.
Resource dependency theory conceptualises the organisation-environment link in
terms of power and an attempt to obtain control over resources. In terms of furtherhigher
education collaboration this would provide a means for further-higher
providers to access resources in the form of an HE brand that would otherwise not
be available. However this is not a straightforward exchange nor is it a symmetrical 
118
one. It is a relation of dependency as well as an opportunity to access new
resources.
Resource dependency theory focuses on exchanges between organisations and
their environment and power asymmetries that are embedded in these exchanges.
From this perspective organisations try to minimise their dependence on others
and external factors by controlling resources. Thompson (1967) was one of the
earliest theories to consider relations between organisations and their external
environment. Pfeffer and Salanick (1978) are other seminal thinkers in this
tradition. There are also similarities with the resource based view of the firms
developed by Barney (1991). When applied to further-higher education the insights
provided by resource dependency theorists suggest that acquisition of resources is
a means to accessing power and reducing dependency on other organisations in
the same organisational field.
Complementing the work of organisational theorists are contributions from the
sociological study of science and technology and ANT that focus on the boundary
work that takes place at the science-policy interface. Insights from these studies on
the role and function of boundary organisations and the boundary objects they
produce are applied to theorising the boundary work taking place at the furtherhigher
interface. These contributions are dealt with in greater depth below.
The work of economic sociologists more broadly considers the embeddedness of
the economic in the social and the role of institutions in the social construction of
organisational forms. Central to the analysis is the role of institutions and the 
119
processes of institutionalisation in further-higher education. This is investigated
and theorised using these different inter-disciplinary traditions within one analytical
framework.
New and Old Institutionalism
There are a number of varieties of institutionalism. One common distinction is that
made between old and new institutionalism. Old institutionalism is associated with
authors such as Selznick (1957) who emphasised power and interests in the
pursuit of institutionalised goals within organisations. However, critics of the old
institutionalism claim it tends towards being descriptive and normative rather than
analytical.
New institutionalism takes a variety of forms that Hall and Taylor (1996) sub-divide
into rational institutionalism, historical institutionalism and sociological
institutionalist versions. New institutionalism tends to emphasise cognitive
processes and the transmission of norms and values and the search for
institutional legitimacy as one of its core themes. In particular the emphasis on
institutional conformity and the transmission of norms and values originating in the
institutional environment in which organisations operate has been prominent, as
has the role of institutional isomorphism (DiMaggio and Powell, 1983, Powell and
DiMaggio (1991). Isomorphism refers to the institutional pressures organisations
come under to converge towards similar organisational forms when subject to
similar institutional environmental forces. 
120
New institutionalist economics in the rational choice tradition is more oriented to
theory development. This is usually within a neo-classical economic framework
that retains a commitment to methodological individualism. However, new
institutionalists extend the rationality postulate of neo-classical economic theory to
argue that economic behaviour cannot simply be understood in terms of an
individual pursuing pure self interest. Not only do individuals and organisations
operate under conditions of bounded rationality rather than perfect information that
will limit their ability to calculate outcomes but preference formation is mediated by
institutions. New institutionalists, therefore, incorporate institutions into their
analysis while retaining a core analytical commitment to understanding economic
behaviour in terms of a relaxed form of the rationality postulate of neo-classical
economics. Three versions of this rational choice approach associated with new
institutionalist economics are transaction costs economics, principal agent theory
and public choice theory each one of which will be considered below.
New institutionalist economics in the guise of transaction cost theory examines the
structural attributes of transactions that take place at the further-higher interface
and across sector and inter-organisational boundaries. These exchanges are
considered in terms of their functional fit with the institutional arrangements or
governance structures with which they are aligned. This is basically an economic
argument that claims those governance structures that are most effective in
reducing transaction cost for specific types of transactions will be chosen on the
basis of their comparative efficiency. This is a somewhat under socialised concept
of economic man that tends to ignore power, conflict and collective vested
interests. 
121
Neo-institutionalist theorists are distinct from new institutional economic theorists in
that they focus on cognitive, cultural and other contextual factors rather than
individual rationality in explaining the function of institutions. Neo-institutionalist
thinkers explore the relationship between the institutional environment in which
organisations must operate and organisational legitimacy.
According to key seminal neo-institutionalist thinkers the search for organisational
legitimacy and conformity to institutionalised norms and classifications originating
in the external institutional environment may result in a set of rationalised myths
(Meyer and Rowan, 1977). These symbolic and ritualised expressions of
organisational life may sit alongside the technical core and task environment of an
organisation and do not follow the same institutional logic. One consequence is
that the formal organisational structure, the technical core and task environment of
an organisation may sit alongside ceremonial and symbolic representations of its
activities and practices. Moreover, these two dimensions of organisational life do
not simply conform to a search for technical efficiency.
One key variant of neo-institutionalist analysis that will be used in this thesis is
based upon the work of Douglas on grid-group analysis. This is a neo-Durkheimian
analysis of how institutionalised systems of classification reflect the broader social
structure, underlying principles of social organisation and broader structures of
legitimation. Originally developed in social anthropology to compare how different
cultures classify their environments it can also be use to explore the role of 
122
anomaly and paradox in systems of classification including how further-higher
education is classified.
Douglas’ schema is applied here as a heuristic device for understanding the
classification of the further-higher interface and the anomalous nature of some
further-higher education provision within a system for classifying all non-university
and university based HE. The classification and categorisation of further-higher
education, it is argued, reflects the ordering of power relations at the further-higher
interface. Boundary work at the further-higher interface is considered a rhetorical
and strategic activity that mediates the institutional duality of further-higher
education. Power and interests are at work in this process. Institutionalised
systems of classification reflect distinct patterns and dispositions of power in
organising economic life. In the case of further-higher education these also reflect
distinct tacit assumptions about the distinctiveness of further-higher education as a
legitimate form of HE. This approach will be applied to the analysis of modes of
organising at the further-higher interface in chapter Six. There the grid-group
heuristic is used as a medium for contextualising, mapping and clarifying the
trends and processes found in institutional and organisational change in furtherhigher
education.
There are other variations of institutionalisms that are broadly divided into
economic and sociological variants. Each emphasise different aspects of
institutionalisation and the role and function of institutions. However, one thing they
retain in common is that they put institutions centre stage of their analysis. 
123
Why Institutions Matter
Following North (1990) an institution is defined as the humanly devised constraints
that shape and guide human interactions. Institutions reduce uncertainty and
ambiguity in the conduct of everyday life by providing a structure to human
interaction and behaviour (North, 1990, p. 3). Institutions may include any kind of
formal and informal constraints or rules that human beings devise to shape
interactions. North specifically defines institutions as:
"….. a set of constraints on behaviour in the form of rules and
regulations; a set of procedures to detect deviations forms the rules
and regulations; and, finally, a set of moral, ethical behavioural
norms which define the contours that constrain the way in which the
rules and regulations are specified and enforcement is carried out"
(North, 1984, p8).
Scott, another well known new institutionalist thinker provides another definition by
arguing that institutions are:
“cognitive, normative, and regulative structures and activities that
provide stability and meaning to social behaviour”
(Scott, 1995, p33).
The concept of an institution as used and debated in the new institutionalist
paradigm and in particular by North is crucial to the argument that follows. The
claim is that institutions matter and constitute the structures of constraint and
choice that mobilise other organisational, political and cultural processes at the
further-higher interface. The dual importance of formal and informal dimensions of 
124
institutions is crucial to understanding whether a policy shift is likely to succeed or
fail. Institutions effectively infuse values, preferences and incentives in
organisational practices (Selznick, 1957). Cognition of these preferences varies
according to circumstances and institutional, organisational and individual
alertness. The grid-group heuristic is used as a heuristic device for mapping the
contextual dimensions of the institutional landscape and environment in furtherhigher
education. Practice is embedded in the context of an organisational field
that constitutes the setting in which the players, following North, follow the ‘rules of
the game’. Thus institutions constitute the formal and informal ‘rules of the game’
while organisations constitute the players of the game.
One of the most significant features of the institutional landscape of further-higher
education is that it is subject to institutional duality. While policy is largely
formulated and implemented through the HE sector, the actual delivery of furtherhigher
education takes place in the FE sector. Sector loyalties, identities past
histories and conventions therefore play a significant part in configuring the
institutional landscape of further-higher education.
Davis and North (1970, p133) make a distinction between the institutional
environment and institutional arrangements. Institutional arrangements refer to the
specific institutional mechanisms which coordinate transactions and economic
exchanges such as markets or hierarchies. The institutional environment refers to
background sets of institutions such as formal laws and informal conventions that
oversee the operation of specific configurations of institutional arrangements. 
125
Analytically the latter are basically meso level constructs while the institutional
environment is a macro level one.
Organisations operate within configurations of institutional arrangements and are
goal directed and set up for specific purposes. In further-higher education the
significant characteristic of these organisations is that they are combined in semicompulsory
inter-organisational collaborations largely steered by the central state.
They are bilaterally dependent on each other and must operate across sector and
organisational boundaries and interfaces.
This next section looks at the contribution of new institutional economics for
understanding the dynamics of institutionalisation at the further-higher interface
and in particular three influential streams of new institutional economics thinking
including transaction cost economics, principal agent theory and public choice
theory. What these approaches have in common is that they retain a fundamental
commitment to a rational choice model of preference formation. They emphasise
to varying degrees that the core rationality postulate of rational choice theory
remains at the centre of analysis. While they incorporate a relaxed model of
rationality that allows a flexible view of rationality what they hold in common to
varying degrees of emphasis is an assumption that economic behaviour is both
purposive yet moderated through institutional environments that channel choice. 
126
Rational Choice Institutionalism
Rational Choice Institutionalism is fundamentally neo-classical in its underpinnings
and represents one of the three strands of institutional theory mentioned above.
This variant of institutionalism is dominated by an economic version of the role of
institutions in regulating economic life. It retains an assumption that organisational
decision makers are rational in the choices they make and informed in making
them. The assumption of rational choice is central to this approach. However, the
version of institutionalism commonly associated with this tradition relaxes some of
these core assumptions of rational decision making processes to include the
possibility of bounded rationality and to propose that all organisational decision
makers have limited cognitive capabilities and must deal with uncertainty and
ambiguity.
Bounded rationality simply means that decision makers do not have access to
perfect information, are limited in their abilities to calculate the optimum
consequence of making one decision rather than another and ‘satisfice’ rather than
maximise when they make choices. In other words they make do on limited
information and under contextual constraints. These traditions are outlined below.
The conceptual framework that underlies new institutional economics is
predominantly a neo-classical one that offers a relaxed view of the rationality
postulate that is at the centre of neo-classical economics. The three variants of
new institutional economics that have tended to dominate are discussed below. 
127
The first is transaction cost economics which was largely developed from the work
of Coase (1937) and Williamson (1985). The second is based on principal agent
theory and complements the transaction cost outlook. This second tradition
emerged through the contributions of writers such as Alchian and Demsetz (1972),
Eisenstadt (1989), Fama (1989) and Jensen (1976). A third variant of new
institutionalism is public choice theory.
Each of these academic contributions to modern economics has had a significant
impact on the emergence of ideas associated with NPM in the public sector that
are discussed in chapter eight. Followers of NPM effectively argue for the
introduction of private sector business practices, markets, competition and the use
of managerialist forms of coordinating public sector organisations according to
private sector practices.
Williamson who built on the earlier work of Coase is generally considered to be the
key figure in the development of transaction cost economics. He argues that there
are various costs incurred in the process of transacting exchanges and in the
process of coordinating economic action which are generally referred to as
transaction costs. Transaction cost economics argues that the reduction of
transaction costs can be achieved through the adoption of the most appropriate
governance structure or institutional arrangements for coordinating transactions to
match the structural attributes of the transaction.
Williamson used a comparative framework to compare the transaction costs of
operating under one governance structure or set of specific institutional 
128
arrangements when compared to alternative governance forms. He identified
markets, hierarchy, networks or hybrid forms as the core alternative governance
structures that transaction cost economics considers. The preferred governance
structure according to Williamson will be the one that most adequately matches the
transactional attributes of the exchange to the associated governance structure.
The most efficient match will in turn minimise transaction costs. In effect what is
important is which form of economic organisation will minimise transaction costs
relative to another. Applied to further-higher education, transaction cost economics
would consider the most ‘efficient’ organisational form for achieving these goals to
be the one that reduced the transaction costs of adopting that organisational form.
This is of course an argument from economics based upon efficiency criteria.
Transaction cost economics identifies four core structural components of
transactions: asset specificity, frequency, uncertainty and small numbers
bargaining and makes a number of behavioural assumptions about the economic
agents engaged in transacting including bounded rationality and opportunism or
self ‘seeking with guile’ to use Williamson’s phrase.
In conditions of asymmetrical information in which one party to a transaction is
more knowledgeable that the other there is always the possibility of a partner
behaving opportunistically or as Williamson terms it, using ‘self seeking with guile’.
The condition of bounded rationality means that parties to the transaction rarely
have perfect information available to them. Reducing opportunism therefore is a
key goal of transaction cost economics. 
129
Transaction cost theory is concerned with the efficient alignment with transactions
to institutional arrangements or governance structures. It argues that a particular
form of governance whether it be the market or via hierarchy will be chosen
because it is the more efficient in reducing transaction costs. This economic
approach tends to ignore the context in which transactions at the further-higher
interface are embedded and issues of power. Contextualising these transactions
against a wider economic, political, social and cultural setting is a necessary step
for understanding further-higher education as an instituted process.
The concept of asset specificity is generally considered to be the key transactional
attribute in transaction costs economics. Asset specificity refers to durable
relationship specific investments that are tied in some way to the transacting
parties. It is a function of a bilateral dependency between two independent and
autonomous organisations such as those found in further-higher education.
In the further-higher education organisational field all transactions exhibit relatively
high degrees of asset specificity because they are by definition collaborative
arrangements that tie each organisation or agency into some form of mutual
dependency. The inter-organisational relations found in further-higher education
whether based upon a franchise, consortium, direct or indirect funding are
examples of collaborative structures that habitually involve the drawing and
crossing of sector and organisational boundaries. Not only is it difficult to deploy
these assets to alternative uses in these circumstances but the switching costs can
incur considerable transaction costs as in the change of a collaborative partner.
Thus further-higher education exhibits medium to high levels of asset specificity 
130
because of this inter-organisational bilateral dependence and the semi-compulsory
nature of the collaborations that take place there.
The components of asset specificity are considered to be the crucial attribute of the
transaction. However, the degree of uncertainty under which a transaction takes
place is also important. At this point it is important to make a technical distinction
between uncertainty and risk which are terms that are often used inter changeably.
In the economics literature risk can generally be assigned a value or rather a
probability and to some extent can be measured. This, for example, is how
actuaries operate in the insurance business. On the other hand uncertainty cannot
be measured: it is a qualitative condition and perception. Transaction cost
economics uses the term uncertainty.
As uncertainty cannot be measured whereas a probability measure can be
assigned to the economic concept of risk an organisation’s perceptions,
preferences and incentive structures are best understood as historically and
socially constructed. It is the function of institutions to reduce uncertainty and
enhance predictability hence the grid group heuristic developed in an earlier
chapter is utilised to map and conceptualise these institutional processes of
preference formation in their specific contexts.
Bearing this technical distinction between risk and uncertainty in mind,
organisations that are described as ‘risk averse’ may in reality be described as
uncertainty avoiding. However, using the conventional term ‘risk averse’ furtherhigher
education deliverers may spread risk or delegate it through a collaborative 
131
arrangement such as franchising. Indeed, in some cases this is what happened in
the early post incorporation days of further-higher education franchising when a
small number of universities withdrew from franchise agreements at short notice in
order to respond to a changing and volatile policy environment in a typically short
term reactive response. Franchising could thus be used to rapidly expand provision
but also to contract it under unfavourable economic conditions. Most of the power
to do this lay with the university partner.
The frequencies with which transactions take place are another core component of
transaction cost economics. The long term and the short term duration of
transactions is a key factor that decision makers must take into account in
engaging in inter-organisational collaboration. It takes a lot of time and effort to
build costs and collaboration does not come cheap. The longer the collaboration
lasts or has existed the more likely that a form of relational contracting and shared
understandings based upon normative and regulative institutional pressures will
evolve and that trust will become an important factor. Transactions are likely to
become embedded in social relations the more frequent a transaction occurs
simply because asymmetrical information will be reduced through increased
familiarity with partners. Boundary spanning roles and boundary crossing
facilitation is likely to develop, too.
Williamson sometimes refers to the small bargaining problem by which he means
that in situations where high levels of asset specificity exists between two or a
small number of transacting partners, there is a greater risk of one or more of the 
132
transacting parties acting opportunistically. Competitive mechanisms are not
effective in such situations when asset specificity is high.
One strategy adopted by some further-higher education deliverers was to operate
with multiple partners. This raises the transaction costs of coordination and
monitoring exchanges but reduces uncertainty by spreading ‘risk’ or uncertainty.
The Dearing report recommended that this should not be the typical arrangement.
Some further-higher education providers went down this route despite this
recommendation to enhance their bargaining power.
The deliberate alignment of preferences and incentive structures under conditions
of asymmetrical information in which one of the transacting partners, usually the
agent, knows more than the principal, presents an agency problem. It may well be
difficult to observe or monitor or measure the labour process of the agent under
these conditions hence incentive structures need to be created that encourage the
agent to act in the interest of the principal. When multiple stakeholders and
competing interests coexist as they do in the further-higher organisational field, the
problem of aligning multiple organisational preferences presents regulators with a
‘wicked problem’. Principal agent theory deals only this problem of complexity by
assuming that organisational preferences can be reduced to a set of contractually
based RATIONAL CHOICE (CHECK) principal agent problems. These ‘tame
problems’, in contrast to the ‘wicked problems’ that are typically evident in furtherhigher
education, are premised on a neo-classical model of rational economic
behaviour. 
133
Thus principal agent theory has evolved to address agency problems. The
relationship between the principal and agent is effectively a formal contract.
Multiple principal agent relations are conceptualised as a series of individual
contracts in which the conditions of the contract are expected to be explicitly and
formally codified. This rather one dimensional analysis tends to ignore the contexts
in which agency problems emerge and the situational embeddedness of principal
agent relations in different institutional, organisational structures and cultural
environments. Moreover, non-market transaction costs and the informal dimension
of economic organisation are rarely the focus of study in new institutional
economics.
Agency problems need to be understood situationally, contextually and relationally
and are not necessarily formal and when more than one organisation is involved
they are even more complex. Often they are based upon relational contracting that
evolves with time and agents cannot specify all possible outcomes as would be the
case in a formal contract. Hence incomplete contracting poses problems for
principal agent theory because the conditions of successful contract completion
cannot be determined in advance. Moreover, the assumptions of agency theorists
that are common to transaction cost economics are associated with a-priori
behavioural assumptions about rationality and opportunism, or in the language of
principal agent theory, moral hazard and adverse selection. These are theoretical
givens and not investigated inductively or empirically to establish their truth value.
In particular, there is potential for opportunism and moral hazard under conditions
of asymmetrical information. Goal incongruence results when principal and agent 
134
do not share the same preferences or respond to the same incentive structures.
Dysfunctional behaviour can result when this occurs or perverse incentives can be
generated that distort the behaviour of agents. After all, the principal agent problem
is effectively one of preference alignment. This may then raise transaction costs.
Principal agent theory along with transaction cost economics and public choice
theory have been influential in providing a theoretical basis for neo-liberal reforms
instigated in the public sector. The theoretical edifice on which these reforms are
largely based has been mined for their contribution to understanding the complex
dynamics of institutional and organisational transformation in further-higher
education.
Historical Institutionalism
Another significant variant of institutionalist thinking is historical institutionalism.
This variant of institutionalism uses the concept of path dependency to
conceptualise the process of institutionalisation and capture how historical
processes and pre existing institutional environments and arrangements can
influence the configuration of contemporary institutional environments. Path
dependency simply means that past structures, systems and processes can
influence the present.
In further-higher education the legacies of prior institutional configurations of the
further-higher interface still retains a substantial hold on the identities of
contemporary further-higher education providers (Smith, 2008). Sector identities 
135
and loyalties remain strong (Parry, 2008) and may have primacy in terms of how
decision makers perceive themselves as further-higher education providers. Path
dependency may play a significant role in the configuration of contemporary
structures, systems and processes.
While the concept is somewhat more complex than the simple statement that
history matters, path dependency in further-higher education is extremely
important because it targets the relationship between prior institutional
environments and institutional arrangements and the contemporary configuration
of the further-higher education organisational field.
Neo-Institutionalism and Sociological Institutionalism
Sociological institutionalism draws on the work of DiMaggio and Powell (1983)
among others who were the seminal thinkers in developing this branch of
institutional thought. The cognitive and symbolic dimension of institutional
behaviour is emphasised in this tradition as is the search for legitimacy. In common
with work done by economic sociologists such as Granovetter economic action is
conceptualised as being embedded in social relations. For DiMaggio and Powell
these social relations are configured and contested in organisational fields.
One of the weaknesses of the new economic institutionalist approaches dealt with
above is a lack of context. When transaction are treated as disembodied economic
exchanges that occur in isolation from broader socio-political, social and cultural
pressures and contexts this type of methodological individualism is not likely to 
136
capture significant situational factors that influence organisational behaviour.
Transactions and exchanges are embedded in wider contexts. One meso level
construct that provides a means of contextualising transactions at the furtherhigher
interface is that of an organisational field. Sociological institutionalism
emphasises that all economic transactions are embedded in social, cultural and
political institutional environments.
Fields, Fissions and Fractures
The organisational field is the site at which further-higher education organisations
strategise and implement the ‘rules of the game’ in practice. The concept of an
organisational field is drawn from a neo-institutionalist reading of how institutions
oversee organisational change. Originally derived from the work of Bourdieu (1977,
1992) the concept of field as it was developed by Di Maggio and Powell is defined
as:
"those organizations that, in the aggregate, constitute a recognized
area of institutional life: key suppliers, resource and product
consumers, regulatory agencies, and other organizations that
produce similar products or services" (Powell and DiMaggio, 1991, p
64).
Organisational fields tend to emerge and mature and become embedded in the
institutional fabric with:
“an increase in the extent of interaction among organizations in the
field; the emergence of sharply defined interorganizational structures 
137
of domination and patterns of coalition; an increase in the information
load with which organizations in a field must contend; and the
development of a mutual awareness among participants in a set of
organizations that they are involved in a common enterprise”
(DiMaggio and Powell, 1983, p149).
The organisational field of which further-higher education is a sub-ordinate sub
component is comprised of a stratified set of inter related organisations that cross
the further-higher interface. They are united by the common issue or goal of
widening access and participation to HE for non traditional students.
Organisations within the field have differential access to power and resources and
disparities in their ability to effect, resist or implement policy change. Fields are
sites of contestation, and the intersection of different organisational interests and
preferences, with each organisation engaged in a struggle for resources and a
search for legitimacy within its field.
Further-higher education is part of one wider organisational field and movement
towards a mass higher education system but is subject to divergent institutional
pressures rooted in different institutional logics that characterises the further-higher
interface. In contrast to the claims of some neo-institutional analyst, who stress the
trend towards isomorphism as a field matures, further-higher education is subject
to contradictory institutional pressures. These create situations in which
organisations within the field both converge towards, and diverge from, one model
of practice. These contradictory pressures reflect the institutional duality of furtherhigher
education and the structural differentiation within further-higher education
and HE of funding, planning and quality arrangements along sector lines. These
are the legacies of the separate sector histories and identity. 
138
In neo-institutionalist analysis isomorphic pressures in the form of coercive
isomorphism, normative isomorphism and mimetic isomorphism push
organisations towards adopting similar organisational forms. These are distinct
from competitive pressures that affect organisations in a field and are more to do
with a search for legitimacy than simply technical competence.
Coercive isomorphism refers to pressures that can impose sanctions if ignored and
are often based upon funding and quality regimes that have the power to apply
sanctions for non compliance. Normative isomorphism refers to peer pressure or
for example the influence of professional bodies in influencing organisational
behaviour. Mimetic isomorphism refers to copying another organisational model
that is perceived as being successful without understanding the basis of that
success.
The institutional duality of further-higher education and the prior existence of
separate funding, planning and quality at the interface mean that different
institutional pressures, institutional logics and conflicting goals operate
simultaneously. All organisations within the organisational field are subject to the
pressures of massification and marketisation. One consequence is that ‘market
forces’ co-exist in an uneasy tension with collaborative policy imperatives. The
cross sector and inter-organisational boundary work that this results in is designed
to widen participation. Yet the problem of aligning market forces and equity issues
in an increasingly diverse and highly stratified organisational field does not appear
to be subject to a one size fits all solution. 
139
Institutional Environments and Institutional Arrangements
Following Davis and North (1970) a distinction is made between the institutional
environment, or governance structures, and institutional arrangements found in
further-higher education. These distinctions are significant because they help
identify the different levels of analysis that are necessary for understanding the
further-higher education across the macro level of the institutional environment and
social structures, the meso level of institutional arrangements and their
institutionalisation in organisational fields and the micro level of the semicompulsory
collaborative inter-organisational transactions and exchanges that
constantly take place at the further-higher interface.
Institutional arrangements reflect the duality of further-higher education and an
organisational field, in which, despite a common focus on widening participation
and access, exhibits coalitions and alliances and contests over resources, power
and influence.
Within the organisational field boundary organisations act as intermediaries
connecting the further-higher interface, producing boundary objects and engaging
in boundary work that reinforces and reconfigures the interface in a constant
process of organising and disorganising.
The concept of the institutional environment refers to the more abstract and
general ‘rules of the game’, such as the laws and statutes and other codified 
140
legislation effecting further-higher education. The institutional arrangements refer
to the institutional configurations or governance structures that act as boundary
organisations and implement the ‘rules of the game’. Together these frame the
meso level of the organisational field and its internal dynamics constituting
institutionalised and embedded behaviour and practices.

Institutional environment (‘rules of the game’)
MACRO
Established through legislation
Formal and informal norms linked to national
cultures
Institutional arrangements (governance structures)
MACRO TO MESO LINKAGES
Markets (quasi-markets)
Networks or structured collaboration
Hierarchy or command from the centre
Hybrid institutional arrangements
Organisational field
MESO
Suppliers
Regulators
Producers and consumers
Competitors and partners
Boundary Work
(boundary organisations/boundary objects)
MESO – MICRO LINKAGES
Funding bodies
Planning bodies
Quality assurance bodies
Guides to best practice
Organisational Forms-Hybrids
MICRO
Franchises
Consortiums
Validation/accreditation
Direct/Indirect Funding
Dual or binary further-higher provision
Table 5.1 
141
Table 5.1 outlines this analytical framework schematically identifying the macro,
meso and micro linkages across different levels of analysis. The macro level of the
institutional environment is linked to the wider social structure. The further-higher
organisational field is the medium through which the ‘rules of the game’
established in the institutional environment become institutionalised as collective
practices at the meso-level. Within the organisational field organisational practices
and strategies evolve as adaptive responses to the organisations environment
through a process of hybridisation at the further-higher interface.
Classifying the Further-Higher Interface
In this section a model drawn from an analysis of classification systems developed
by Douglas is introduced to explore the mechanisms whereby further-higher
education is classified and categorised. Chapter Six is devoted to an exploration of
the grid-group heuristic and the role and function of classification systems in
further-higher education. Grid-group analysis is used as a heuristic device for
understanding institutional and organisational change in further-higher education. It
is argued that the act of categorisation and classification contributes to the
legitimisation of the phenomenon being classified. Anomalies, tensions and
paradoxes identified in classification systems indicate situations in which legitimacy
is contested.
Douglas’ development of the grid-group heuristic, was first provisionally explored in
her book ‘Natural Symbols’ (Douglas, 1970) in which she attempted to investigate
the relation between patterns of social organisation and systems of classification in 
142
different cultures. Her basic claim was that any system of classification is the
product of social relations (Douglas, 1970, p62) and that cognition and modes of
social organisation are linked. Therefore all human cognition is culturally filtered
through perceptual categories rooted in the experience of human beings of distinct
forms of social organisation and experiences of social relations. She refers to
these perceptual filters as mechanisms that generate ‘cultural biases’ within
systems of institutionalised classification.
Her basic argument is that the social structure and the social construction of
individual and group preferences or ‘cultural bias’ within that social structure are
mediated through concrete patterns of social organisation and social relations and
are thus interlinked and embedded in concrete experience. Perception reflects
structure, although not in a deterministic or functionalist way.
In her original grid-group analysis she attempted to capture the general properties
of classification systems and the iteration of social structure, patterns of social
relations and social organisation, perception and ‘cultural bias’. Here the grid-group
heuristic is specifically applied to investigating the social construction of
organisational preferences and incentives in further-higher education.
Organisational preferences and positioning strategies are conceptualised as being
embedded in a wider system of institutionalised classifications that reflect
underlying principles and structures of constraint and choice in the further-higher
education organisational field. 
143
The grid-group heuristic can be used as an analytical device that links patterns of
social interaction, social organisation and social structure to systems of
classification. This can be conceptualised across different levels of analysis and
generalisation. The macro institutional environment configures the parameters of
the meso level of the further-higher organisational field. Within the organisational
field organisational preferences and positioning strategies emerge as the outcome
of the interaction of structure and agency and can be considered at the micro level
of organisational practice.
Tracking changes in the categorisation and configuration of further-higher
education over time through analysing shifts in the grid and group dimensions is
useful in revealing shifts in the interactions between the institutional environment,
organisational field and organisational practices. The organisational cognition of
group and organisational preferences and incentives of organisations at the
further-higher interface is filtered through the macro institutional environment and
via different institutional arrangements.
Different institutional environments and institutional arrangements influence how
systems of classification are institutionalised. An attempt is made to apply this to
understanding how further-higher education is classified as a system and in
relation to its link with HE.
The analytical purchase of the grid-group heuristic resides in its ability to analyse
different organisational forms against the institutional context in which they are
found and link them to the resultant institutional collective preferences, incentives 
144
and behaviour of organisational agents in further-higher education. It can also help
capture those anomalous categories that do not fit into an existing system of
classification. In this sense further-higher education can be conceptualised as an
anomalous category and example of ‘matter out of place’ in a wider system of
classification that includes traditional HE. The symbolic boundary work that takes
place in classifying the further-higher interface reflects underlying assumptions and
principles of social organisation and status distinctions.
Boundary Work in Further-Higher Education
This section analyses the boundary work and the processes of hybridisation that
take place at the further-higher education interface. It sets the context for chapter
Seven which deals with the issues of boundaries and boundary working in furtherhigher
education. Boundaries mark a disjuncture in systems of classification,
categorisation and organisational practices. The extent to which boundaries in
further-higher education are blurring and becoming more permeable will inevitably
affect the ability of further-higher providers to work collaboratively with both the FE
and HE sectors.
Boundary work at the further-higher interface will be investigated using insights
from neo-institutionalist readings of organisational theory on the role and function
of hybrid organisational forms. This will be supplemented by work done on
boundary work in scientific fields that investigate how scientists with technical and
expert knowledge communicate with non specialist policy communities. 
145
In particular the contextual embeddedness of further-higher education in two
distinct institutional environments is discussed and considered from the
perspective of boundary work at the interface. Not only must further-higher
providers operate under ‘rules of the game’ that were drawn up in the HE sector
but they must conform to different ‘rules’ in their day to day operational activities.
This is because further-higher providers are responsible and accountable to FE
sector bodies for their infrastructure and the bulk of their funding.
The process of hybridisation taking place at the further-higher interface not only
blurs the boundaries between FE and HE but transferring and legitimising practices
that originate in one sector but are applied in another can be problematic.
Hybrid organisational forms in further-higher education are increasingly common.
Such hybrids are mixes of modes of coordination are drawn from different host
contexts and institutional environments. They are embedded in relations of bilateral
dependency and asset specific transactions that involve autonomous and
independent organisations whose identities nevertheless remain separate. Sector
loyalties and identities remain firmly entrenched in further-higher education (Smith,
2008).
A conceptual vocabulary is introduced that builds on the grid-group heuristic. It will
be used to construct an analytical framework that contributes to understanding the
significance of contextual embeddedness in further-higher education. The FE and
HE sectors have different origins and institutional environments. Further-higher
education to some extent must respond to both. This institutional duality will be 
146
likely to generate more tensions to the extent that the two host institutional
environments, FE and HE, are institutionally distant or proximate. The greater the
degree of contextual embeddedness the more likely that the similarities will
outweigh the differences and inter-sector and inter-organisational collaboration is
facilitated. Nevertheless, boundary work at the further-higher interface mediates
the differences between sectors and organisations. Incorporating boundary work
into the analytical model and conceptualising its dynamics is central to the
analytical framework developed.
Boundary work is a concept initially drawn from sociologically informed
investigations of science and technical studies and the sociology of science
(Gieryn, 1983, 1995) which has been used to explore the interactions of
communities of scientist to non scientists. Science is conducted in one context
according to a set of practices, procedures and values; while policy is the domain
of another. How the two communicate across this divide when levels of technical
understanding and the assumptions underpinning that knowledge are in the
possession of one party but not the other is similar to the situation in further-higher
education. The practices, identities and values underlying FE and HE are not
always congruent nor is their acceptance across sector divides as a legitimate form
of higher education in the context of a hybridising further-higher interface taken for
granted. Transferring these distinct structures, cultures, practices and processes
across sector divides requires translation and boundary work that facilitates the
legitimation and acceptance of change. It cannot be assumed in advance. 
147
Here the concept of boundary work is applied to further-higher education and interorganisational
collaboration across sector divides. How do FE and HE partners
with different structures, traditions, cultures, established modus operandi and
understanding collaborate effectively across organisational and sector boundaries?
Boundary work refers to the process of boundary crossing, boundary maintenance
and social and cultural reproduction that takes place at the further-higher interface.
It is concerned with the mechanisms and processes for translating and
communicating across boundaries. Boundary work takes a variety of forms but is
essential to the inter-organisational collaboration that takes place at the furtherhigher
interface.
Boundary institutions mediate the ‘rules of the game’ that will be specific to
different institutional arrangements and contexts. They establish and link the ‘rules
of the game’ across sectors and interfaces and co-ordinate the different and
distinct institutional logics that govern the workings further-higher education. They
are established through legislation and determine the classification, categorisation
and formal constraints and choices that shape the institutional environment.
A boundary organisation is an intermediary organisational form or agency that
straddles the further-higher interface and acts as an interface for the separate
funding, planning and quality bodies. Boundary organisations enable
communication across the different institutional logics, organisational practices and
interfaces found in further-higher education. They are accountable to two sectors
albeit in differing ways. 
148
Their role and function in mediating the further-higher education interface has
changed over time and in particular during the transition from ‘low policy’ to ‘high
policy’. During the phase of ‘low policy’ their role and function was somewhat
ambiguous and anomalous and they tended to be peripheral. With the shift to ‘high
policy’ these roles and functions were clarified and they played a more significant
part in coordinating further-higher education at the systems level and overseeing
the more structured collaboration of that phase.
Boundary organisations produce boundary objects. The concept of a boundary
object is useful in helping understand the mechanisms whereby cross sector
collaboration was achieved. Boundary objects are mediums that bridge the
disjuncture of practices found at the further-higher interface and mediate the flow
of resources, knowledge and pace and salience of learning across organisational
boundaries. Boundary organisations produce boundary objects that function to
bridge disjunctures in understanding and practices across inter-organisational
boundaries. Examples of boundary objects in further-higher education include
codes of practice, circulars and policy documents. However, they can also refer to
events, processes and protocols.
Boundary objects function to mediate and integrate the heterogeneity, diversity,
differentiation of perspectives, frames and meaning that are found in organisations
engaged in inter-organisational collaboration. To the extent that boundary objects
become institutionalised over time as common and embedded practices they are
legitimised. On the other hand ineffective boundary objects are not accepted as
legitimate. 
149
Existing analysis of the role and function of boundary organisations and boundary
objects in inter-organisational collaboration in further-higher education is limited
and largely descriptive rather than analytical. Boundary work needs to be placed in
a wider historical, contextual and analytical conceptual framework in order to
explore the function of boundary organisations and boundary objects in oiling the
system and organisational field. Chapter Eight explores these boundary concepts
in more depth. 
150
CHAPTER SIX: CLASSIFICATION AT THE FURTHERHIGHER
EDUCATION INTERFACE
The institutional and organisational changes that have been a key feature of the
evolution of the further-higher interface over the last two decades are
conceptualised in this chapter through the work of Douglas (1966, 1970) on
classification systems. A neo-institutionalist reading of Douglas’ work is used and
applied to analysing the changing system of classification and categorisation of the
further-higher interface. The further-higher interface is considered as an example
of ‘matter out of place’ being a somewhat anomalous mode of provision situated at
the interstices of FE and HE. Its liminal status is explored through the grid-group
heuristic and the symbolic boundary work that takes place in classifying the
interface is theorised.
The institutional environment of further-higher education is mapped while its
relationship to the further-higher organisational field is investigated and compared
to the ideal typical framework identified through the grid-group heuristic. The gridgroup
analysis adopted here is not presented as a full blown theory. It is used as a
heuristic device useful for clarifying the trajectories of institutional and
organisational change in further-higher education over time. As an analytical
device it moves beyond dualistic concepts such as FE and HE theorised as distinct
categories and allows the exploration of hybrid organisational forms and dual 
151
institutional arrangements as mixes and permutations of elements of both FE and
HE.

Thus the grid-group heuristic is not used empirically to operationalise the highly
diverse and complex organisational forms and institutional arrangements found in
the further-higher organisational field. Rather it is a means of providing a degree of
conceptual and analytical clarity and focus for understanding the dynamics of the
further-higher interface, how it is classified and categorisation and the iteration of
context and process, structure and agency at the further-higher interface
Classification at the further-higher interface reflects the structural underpinnings of
further-higher education. Considered holistically, relationally and as an integrated
system, the disposition of power, status and resources in its organisational field is
conceptualised through the categorical and definitional construction of a system of
higher education provision of which further-higher education is a sub-component
and some would argue marginal feature (Scott, 2009). The transactions and
exchanges that take place at the interface are asymmetrical reflecting the
structural differentiation of further-higher education as part of a wider political
economy. The grid-group heuristic contributes to the construction of an analytical
framework and a conceptual vocabulary for understanding these exchanges and
the context in which they take place.
The main purpose of the chapter is to contextualise the processes of
institutionalisation and de-institutionalisation whereby the categories and systems
of classification that delimit the boundaries of FE and HE are becoming blurred at 
152
the further-higher interface. The roles and functions of boundary organisations that
sit at the further-higher interface and the boundary work they undertake is explored
through the symbolic classifications and definitional categories they use to
demarcate the boundaries of further-higher education.
Indeed, one of the main rationales for adopting a theoretical case study method for
analysing further-higher education is that it is particularly suited to exploring a
‘case’ in which the boundaries between the case and its external environment are
not clearly demarcated or easy to separate. This is reflected in the shifts in the
classification and categorisation of the boundaries of FE and HE and the
identification of further-higher education as a hybrid.
The grid-group heuristic is applied to understanding and classifying the furtherhigher
interface and as a means of developing a concise conceptual vocabulary
and an accompanying analytical framework that allows the exploration of the
institutional and organisational changes taking place at the its interface.
This allows the contextualisation of further-higher education which can then be
explored through a conceptual framework that maps the nuances of institutional
and organisational change at the interface. One of the weaknesses of existing
research into further-higher education is that it is still predominantly descriptive. 
153
An Ecology of Further-Higher Education
According to some early commentators on further-higher education arrangements
(Abramson et al, 1996, Bocock and Scott, 1995) there are both benefits and
downsides to engaging in partnerships. While these have been described they
have rarely been conceptualised via a coherent theoretical and analytical model
that attempts to evaluate these policy shifts. Of special significance in the instance
of further-higher education and the configurations found at the further-higher
interface is the impact of the institutional duality of further-higher education.
Delivered in one sector but largely driven by policy created in another furtherhigher
education exhibits a number of tensions and paradoxes. This chapter
explores some of these anomalies and paradoxes at the further-higher interface
using the grid-group heuristic to identify further-higher education as an interstitial
form of provision.
Institutionalisation Duality
The analytical framework developed here draws on a neo-institutionalist reading of
Douglas’ work to analyse policy transitions at the interface. It is argued that there
are many links between Douglas’ neo-Durkheimian grid-group heuristic and neoinstitutionalism.
As Grendstad and Per Selle (1995) argue, grid-group analysis, or
as it is also often called cultural theory, considers how systems of classification
become institutionalised and reflect the underlying social structure. There is not a
deterministic or functionalist one to one correspondence between systems of
classification and the social structure but rather certain modes of organising reflect 
154
certain values and preferences. This could usefully be transferred to the study of
organisational life at the further-higher education interface and could be transferred
to understanding further-higher education provision and the dynamics of the
interface. Not least of these similarities is the stress on the significance of the
institutionalisation of systems of classification and how they reflect the underlying
social ordering of power and social inequalities. The further-higher education
organisational field is contested and dynamic and the transactions and exchanges
that are embedded within it are asymmetrical and reflect power imbalances across
the interface.
The core idea behind this analytical approach is to place institutions and the
process of institutionalisation at the centre of an analysis of further-higher
education. Organisational preferences and incentives among further-higher
providers reflect the disposition and arrangement of social and economic relations
in its field. This neo-institutionalist approach can be linked to the new
institutionalism of organisational theorists who have tried to conceptualise
institutional and organisational behaviour in terms of the roles and functions of
institutions in regulating the transactions and exchanges found at the further-higher
interface and within the further-higher organisational field.
The Grid-Group Heuristic
This section gives an overview of Douglas’ grid-group model and investigates its
analytical purchase as a heuristic device for tracking institutional and
organisational change at the further-higher interface over twenty years. It has 
155
evolved through a number of versions and revisions (Spickard, 1989) and was then
applied to understanding complex societies and their institutional life and
organisational configurations. The model has in its time been applied to the study
of public administration (Hood, 1998), organisations (Altmarch and Barach et al,
1998), the workplace (Mars, 1982), risk (Dake and Thompson, 1998, Thompson,
1993, Wildansky, 1987) environmental issues (Verweij et al, 2006) and
management (Hendry, 1999).
The basic premise of Douglas’ grid group approach is that there is a link between
the social structures in which social actors and organisations are embedded – that
is the relations between groups and patterns of interaction that comprise the social
structure - and their ‘cultural biases’, the preferences and perceptions of those
social structures held by organisational decision makers and stakeholders. Thus
the structural context is linked to how individuals and organisations perceive, filter,
classify and categorise their institutional and organisational environment.
The institutional environment and organisational field through which the ‘rules of
the game’ are mediated and translated into practice are mapped through the gridgroup
heuristic. This iterative process between macro, meso and micro levels of
analysis produces modes of organising which reflect preferred and largely tacit and
unconscious ways of governing and regulating human behaviour (both formal and
informal) and represent what grid-group analysts refer to as ‘cultural biases’. These
‘cultural biases’ are analogous to the tacit organisational preferences and incentive
structures that are institutionalised as organisational practices in the further-higher
education organisational field. Through the use of the grid-group heuristic those 
156
basic premises are conceptualised and applied to analysing different modes of
organising and governance and the forms of regulation found at the further-higher
interface and how they have changed with policy shifts.
Organisational preferences and incentives among further-higher providers are
collective perceptions rather than individual ones. It is this group identity, and the
collective experiences and perceptions of further-higher organisations of their
institutional environment that is detailed here. The organisational forms that
populate further-higher education are governed by institutionalised ‘rules of the
game’ represented through institutional arrangements that constitute the
governance structures of further-higher education.
The further-higher education providers found at the further-higher interface
strategise within the context of an institutionalised operating environment that
appears taken for granted and classified as ‘normal’. However, the perceptions and
incentives that channel these strategies do not exist in a vacuum and have evolved
from elsewhere and over time have become institutionalised as operational
practices. In the case of further-higher education different FE and HE histories,
identities and sector legacies have combined in a type of institutional duality that
have produced hybrid institutional and organisational forms. The grid-group
heuristic attempts to capture the processes whereby organisational preferences
and incentive structures emerge as reflection of the social relations and
institutionalised contexts through which decision makers make sense of the world
around them. The institutional duality of further-higher education is internalised as
organisational practices that must navigate the duality of further-higher education. 
157
Grid-group analysis is essentially a neo-Durkheimian approach that argues that
there are two generic dimensions of social organisation found in all human
societies. The first is the group dimension which refers to the extent to which a
social actor is incorporated into a wider collectivity and the extent to which
membership of that group regulates or it can sanction a member’s behaviour. The
strength and permeability of the group boundary are significant for effective intersector
and inter-organisational collaboration.
In the context of a further-higher education provider this would refer to the internal
and external structures and organisational processes that in combination would
constitute the boundaries of an organisation.
Boundary setting, boundary work and boundary maintenance mechanisms are
particularly important aspects of analysis for understanding further-higher
education. Not only is the further-higher interface the site at which boundary work
can be most intense and necessary given the different traditions, cultures and
modus operandi of organisation drawn from different sectors, but further-higher
education itself is predicated upon organisational forms based upon a bilaterally
dependent inter-organisational collaboration of some sort that is in reality semicompulsory
and medium to high levels of asset specificity.
The second dimension of grid encapsulates the extent to which behaviour is
proscribed and autonomy constrained by often tacit perceptions internalised into
classificatory schemes, incentives and preferences structures that are shaped by 
158
the institutional landscape and the organisational field of further-higher education.
Grid captures the roles, rules and systems of classification found in further-higher
education. Organisational behaviour and decision making among further-higher
education providers are constrained by the ‘rules of the game’ that the grid
dimension delimits.
By combining the group and grid dimension there are four basic permutations of
possible modes of organising based upon generic propensities designated
hierarchy, egalitarianism, individualism and fatalism. At any one time further-higher
education will display different mixes of these modes of organising and the
associated tacit and implicit assumptions that underpin them.
The strength of this approach to understanding the mixes and permutations of FE
and HE that are found in further-higher education is that it goes beyond dualistic
approaches. For example some models of how economic life is coordinated
contrast markets with hierarchies (the corporate business form or the bureaucratic
public sector organisation). Indeed, Williamson’s model of transaction cost
economics (1975, 1981, 1991) locates markets and hierarchies as polar opposites
on a continuum. In between are hybrid organisational forms and networks. This
has limited use in explaining the processes of hybridisation and the emergence of
organisational forms within further-higher education that represents neither a
market nor a hierarchy but a hybrid. Franchising would be one such example.
Moreover, there are far more permutations of possible ways of organising that
represent neither hierarchy nor individualism but a variety of permutations of both. 
159
Fatalism Hierarchy
Grid Apathy and passivity
Ritualism
Random responses
Bureaucracy or Firms
Authority
Rule following
INDIVIDUALISM EGALITARIAN/ENCLAVED
Grid
Markets
Competition
Entrepreneurship
Communities of practice
Networks
Mutuality
Group (-) Group (+)
Table 6.0
Where group is strong, the top and bottom right hand quadrants result. This
effectively means that the collectivity or organisation is able to sanction individual
behaviour and limit the potential for individuals breaking ranks. A system of social
organisation or mode of organising based upon hierarchy is the result, for example
a bureaucracy or a corporate form when this is based upon role following on the
basis of position in the hierarchy.
In the enclaved further-higher education quadrant although there are more
egalitarian modes of organisation the collectivity is able to implement powerful
sanctions through reputational and other mechanisms or sanctions that make it
difficult for group members to deviate from group norms.
Therefore where group is strong but grid is weak then a mode of organising based
upon a more egalitarian focus results. An example might be a ‘community of
practice’ that transcends the boundaries of different organisations, subject
networks or collaborative research groups. 
160
When grid is weak and group is also weak then an individualist form of economic
organisation tends to result. A market led entrepreneurial culture typical of a shift to
marketisation would be an example. Sanctions are largely economic and
incentives market based.
If grid is strong and group is too then the systems of classification and
categorisation through which experience is organised and preferences and
incentives regulated are clear cut and unambiguous. There is little scope for choice
or awareness of alternative perceptions. The fatalist is an example; their existence
is tightly regulated and is perceived as such. Apathy is internalised. The lack of a
clear group identity isolates the fatalist and makes them ineffective in terms of their
ability to mobilise their interests with others. Some peasant societies exhibit
aspects of fatalism.
Unlike a dichotomy the grid-group heuristic opens up a wider range of
permutations and mixes of FE and HE and mixes of modes of organising at the
further-higher interface and within further-higher education.
Trajectories of Change
The drive towards marketisation and massification largely through franchising
represents a shift down grid and down group; while the transition to ‘high policy’
and semi-compulsory forms of structured collaboration in further-higher education
that followed Dearing marks a move back up grid and up group. 
161
These transitions affected FE and HE differently and there were a diversity of
responses by further-higher education providers to the tensions that resulted in
hybrid organisational forms emerging. However simple dichotomies are unable to
capture this iteration of context and process or to enable a range of combinations
and permutations of modes of organising being considered.
The grid group model therefore provides a heuristic device to map these changes
while the institutional and organisational shifts generated through policy shifts are
explored in terms of a neo-institutionalist conception of what institutions are and
how organisations and the dynamics of organisational agency within further-higher
education operate. This is contextualised against the institutional duality of furtherhigher
education and the four institutional turns identified in part One of the thesis.
Structuration and Fields.
Organisational fields only exist to the extent that they are institutionalised as
practice and identifying the boundaries and internal fault lines of a field is an
empirical question. DiMaggio’s and Powell’s criterion for further-higher education
operationalise the concept of an organisational field and include: an increased
frequency of transactions between field members; an increasing awareness of a
common meaning system; the formation of coalitions and alliances and an
increase in the information load incumbents of the field were subject to. (DiMaggio
and Powell(1983,1991). 
162
On all the criteria suggested by DiMaggio and Powell for analysing the
structuration of a field it could be argued that the further-higher education interface
was moving towards a more mature coherent and structured organisational field.
The overlaps at the margins of the old FE and HE systems that had existed preincorporation
were becoming more permeable and blurred as boundaries shifted
and new funding and quality bodies generated pressures towards common
responses to resource allocation and mechanisms of coordination and control.
The shift from ‘low policy’ to ‘high policy’ had led to an increase in information load
in the form of circulars and policy directives as the profile of further-higher
education was raised post Dearing. Coalitions and alliances formed along preexisting
lines such as the divide between old and new universities, the larger
further-higher education providers and other interest groups within the
organisational field. A common meaning system began to take shape with the
transfer of funding and quality assurance function to HE bodies which meant that
further-higher education providers were increasingly subject to similar if not the
same external institutional environments as HE providers and structured
collaboration was encouraged across sector boundaries. Boundary organisations
such as the HE Academy, LLNs and funding and quality bodies facilitated events
and staff development opportunities at which FE and HE providers could meet.
The institutional pressures identified by DiMaggio and Powell as contributing to the
structuration of organisational fields matured included an analytical distinction
between coercive, normative and mimetic isomorphism. Coercive isomorphism
indicates that institutional forces are backed up by the threat of external sanctions. 
163
Normative pressures refer to values that may be found among professional bodies
or their representatives and mimetic pressures indicates the tendency to imitate
those providers and organisations that are perceived as being successful, even if it
is not fully understood why they are successful.
On each of these dimensions coercive pressures were evident most starkly in FE
through inspection bodies such as the FEFC and the funding claw backs that took
place in the early 1990’s. But they also existed in HE through changes in funding
bodies and quality assurance mechanisms that increasingly required compliance
with common standards.
Normative pressures existed through the growth of peer review in further-higher
education by the QAA in contrast to the top down inspection regime of FE. While it
could be argued that the growth of NPM, managerialism and the increasing
reliance of targets and performance indicators to mimic the workings of the price
mechanism in the market was an example of mimetic pressures. The transfer of
private business sector practices to what had once been a public sector setting
could arguably be said to be another. Chapter Nine explores the changes
associated with NPM in further-higher education and the introduction of private
sector business practices.
Douglas’ grid-group model helps contextualise the reforms justified by those
arguing for a shift to NPM and managerialism and discussed under the heading of
new institutional economics in chapter Five. 
164
Adopting grid-group analysis provides an analytical device and heuristic that can
aid the identification of the trends and trajectories of institutionalisation and
changes of organisational forms in further-higher education that resulted. Given the
institutional duality of further-higher education these transitions created their own
tensions and contradictions that simple dichotomy of FE and HE would be unable
to capture.
Therefore in grid-group’s emphasis on focusing on the relationship between modes
of organisation as an aspect of group and on the external and internalised patterns
of regulation based upon the grid dimension a useful heuristic device has been
constructed for analysing the regulatory shifts and changes in inter and intra
organisational structures and processes at the further-higher education interface.
Both further-higher providers and HE were subject to radical pressures to
restructure their modes of organising across the interface as the further-higher
education organisational field matured and the funding and quality bodies exerted
pressures on them through constructing preferences and incentive structures that
reflected these policy shifts. Underpinning these was increasing pressures towards
the marketisation, massification and corporatisation of further-higher education.
These post incorporation shifts, reforms and the restructuring of the emergent
further-higher organisational field were policy initiatives that were filtered through
social relations that pre-existed them and their legacies remained influential
despite the reconfiguration of the interface. Consequently there was a process of
de-institutionalisation and disembedding of pre existing organisational relations. 
165
Douglas’ grid-group dimensions help capture these as processes rather than as
static snapshots at one point in time.
This division into grid and group allows conceptualisation of the shifts in grid, which
tracks changes in the implementation of the rules, roles and classifications that
typified further-higher education; while the group dimension captures the
membership criteria for group inclusion, the strength, permeability and
embeddedness of group boundaries and the boundary setting mechanisms at
work.
The two dimensions of grid and group are analytical categories and conceptually
act as a heuristic device that helps trace the iterative tensions, paradoxes,
anomalies and complementary characteristics that accompanied policy change in
further-higher education. They help construct a framework and conceptual
vocabulary for understanding how the further-higher interface is configured and
how it has changed. They also offer a means of conceptualising the institutional
environment in which the preferences and incentive structures of organisational
actors in the further-higher organisational field can be understood as iterative
processes that are negotiated rather than imposed.
The grid-group model potentially allows the tracing of tensions, complementary
and congruent behaviour as well as patterns of compliance and resistance among
organisational actors in the further-higher organisational field. Thus processes and
contested behaviour rooted in different institutional logics can be combined with
structures and rule following behaviour and incorporated in an analysis of strategic 
166
behaviours that help explain the emergence of the further-higher organisational
field and the preferences and incentive structures that guided the action of key
players.
The model helps pose the question of how do constituent groups, social structures
and the social relations through which social relations become embedded as
institutionalised practices within the further-higher organisational field influence the
perceptions of key organisational actors? At the further-higher interface the
question is fundamentally concerned with how modes of organising and regulating
the further-higher interface become directed through the institutional systems of
classification that categorise and channel them and how are those processes
perceived? Perception influences organisational behaviour and the preferences
and incentive structures that are captured by the grid dimension shifted
fundamentally as the further-higher organisational field matured.
To apply the insights of Douglas’ model further it is necessary to unpack the
concepts of grid and group and address the relationship between the two. The next
stage of this analysis is then to show how the heuristic can be applied to
understanding the further-higher organisational field and shifts in its internal
structure and external relations. Then it is important to explain what this helps us
understand in terms of shifts in institutional structures and organisational fields
within further-higher education.
Douglas developed the grid dimension as a means to understand the extent to
which social actors are constrained by roles, rules, categories and classifications: 
167
the grid dimension. These perceptions or preferences, referred to as ‘cultural bias’,
are said to reflect the existing social structure and patterns of social relations. They
are the impersonal rules that guide conduct and they may be either formal or
informal. In the context that her approach has been applied here, grid is used to
map an organisational actor’s perceptions and incentive structures to the extent
they reflect policy shifts that have reshaped the institutional infrastructure and
social relations or modes of organising in further-higher education. In terms of grid
these constitute the external formal regulatory structure and internalised processes
of regulation that direct and influence the perceptions of organisational actors.
In further-higher education there is often a lack of clarity about who is responsible
for what and role ambiguity in the perception of the roles of various providers. This
is in part a path dependent consequence of differences in organisational history,
culture and pedagogy between HE providers and further-higher education.
Boundaries and Transgressions
The boundary organisations that straddled the further-higher interface and oversaw
funding, planning and quality functions were not always clear in their roles and
functions especially during the turbulent period of ‘low policy’. The group dimension
captures these processes of boundary work, boundary formation and identity. The
grid dimension captures shifts in the ‘rules of the game’ and their application to
further-higher education. 
168
Grid is about moral regulation, as a Durkheimian would put it, with rule following
behaviour that can either be explicit, formal and encapsulated in written legislation
and formal regulations or tacit and informal. The latter is usually internalised
through socialisation mechanisms and habituated behaviour structured through
institutions and embedded in the organisations interpretation of the ‘rules of the
game’. As North (1990) has argued, institutions constitute the ‘rules of the game’
and organisations the players. The organisational field sets the scene and context
for the playing of the game.
Examples of shifts in the grid dimension at the further-higher education interface
are the formal changes in legal status represented by incorporation and more
informally the interplay of different occupational cultures and professional
associations and organisations who are the players in the further-higher
organisational field. An instance of this would be the coexistence of a collegiate
form of decision making with a managerialist one within a further-higher education
provider or instances of conflicting cultures and modus operandi between
collaborating FECs and HE partners. Thus grid encapsulates values and norms as
well as the legal notion of contract. It also helps capture the processes whereby
organisational preferences and incentive structures are channelled through key
organisational decision makers and the potential conflicts between different
incentive structures and perceptions of these within organisations that sometimes
result. It also addresses the question of who has the power to impose their version
of the dominant procedural, regulatory and professional models of further-higher
practice. In effect this is often the result of a mix of coercive, normative and 
169
mimetic isomorphic dynamics and of the institutional duality of further-higher
education.
Douglas with the help of Hampton (1982) further sub divided the grid dimension
into four parts: insulation, control, autonomy and competition. This version of grid
has been modified below to aid application in modelling the further-higher
organisational field.
Insulation is a measure of the strength of grid and the significant categories and
classifications governing and regulating organisational behaviour: these consist of
formal regulations, legal requirements and informal norms of behaviour. In the
organisational settings analysed here these might be based upon seniority,
authority or position in the organisational field. Where insulation is strong then
alternative perceptions are few. Strongly insulated further-higher education
provision may well segregate its FE and HE provision into separate physical
locations or through the use of separate institutional identities.
Autonomy refers to the extent that organisational actors have the freedom to
dispose of their time and resources. HE providers tend to have greater resources
and are able to award their own degrees whereas further-higher education
providers are not. Furthermore curriculum in development in HE tends to be done
by academics who also deliver courses. In FE curriculum is often pre-packaged
and validated by external validating bodies or franchised. Further-higher education
are also arguably more managerialist in their organisational structures and highly
diverse in their range of post compulsory provision. 
170
Control indicates the degree to which an organisation can control others in the
same organisational field. This can be as a consequence of organisational leaders
who others follow because of their perceived success or status. HE providers tend
to have more influence than further-higher education in the past as they are bigger
and have the power to award degrees. The tension between autonomy and control
is a function of the bilaterally dependent nature of inert-organisational
collaborations in further-higher education and its asset specificity.
Finally competition refers to the extent to which an organisation can have high
levels of autonomy or control from and over others while competing among them
selves. In the context of a further-higher organisational field this often takes the
form of an internal and external status hierarchy. In effect further-higher education
constitutes a sub-ordinate component of a super-ordinate HE organisational field.
The second dimension used, that of group, refers to the extent to which
organisations are integrated into a wider group and hence influenced by other
group pressures, identities, sanctions and boundary setting processes. The
stronger the group dimension, the less permeable the groups boundaries and the
more effective the mechanisms of social closure and outsider exclusion. Group
members will spend more time interacting with other members than non members.
The extent to which these interactions exclude others and enforce the commitment
of members will be an indicator of group. 
171
In further-higher education boundary setting and boundary work is a particularly
important indicator of group. Inter-organisational collaboration across sector
boundaries and organisational boundaries are everyday processes. The theoretical
significance of this boundary work and the role and functions of boundary
organisations that straddle the further-higher interface will be explored in a later
chapter.
Mars (1982) developing Douglas’ ideas proposed four tests for group strength:
frequency, degree of mutuality and scope of interpersonal interactions and the
group's boundary tightness (inclusion/exclusion). This version will be used here.
Frequency of interaction is a relatively straight forward measure. The more
frequently members interact the more likely they are to share common
understandings of the purposes of the interactions. Where frequency is a measure
of inter organisational interaction in an organisational field the longevity of the
interactions and the establishment of a common purpose for the interaction is likely
to influence whether they become embedded as practice and institutionalised.
The dimension of mutuality, Mars’ second sub set of the group dimension, is more
difficult to capture. Nevertheless, it can be translated as a commitment to or shared
tacit understanding of appropriate group behaviour. In an organisational setting
mutuality is likely to be strongest where collaborating organisations share similar
professional, occupational and personal values and respond to similar incentive
structures. Again this is an aspect of a maturing organisational field in which a
common meaning system develops. However, an important feature of further-
172
higher education is that not all commentators accept that it is a legitimate form of
HE provision (Parry et al, 2008).
Scope indicates the extent to which an organisation’s activities overlap with other
areas of activity outside of a specific organisation. For example, the formation of
research networks or of communities of practice or the extent to which genuine
staff development opportunities take place between partners would be an example.
The final aspect boundary definition relates to the processes of boundary work. In
further-higher education group boundaries are both formal and informal. The
different legal statuses of the traditional universities, the new universities and the
FECs delivering HE mark the more visible boundaries. However, informal status
orders based upon reputation are deeply entrenched in the coalitions and alliance
that have formed such as the Russell Group and the MEG.
By combining the grid and group dimensions a heuristic is produced consisting of a
four part frame through which various combinations or permutations of grid and
group can be captured analytically. If there is strong grid and strong group this
results in a hierarchical outlook. Roles are clear cut are usually highly
differentiated, status hierarchies collectively understood and the rules, procedures
and classifications and categorisation of rule following behaviour is unambiguous.
Members belong to status groups within the hierarchy and identify with and are
bounded by the group’s impact on behaviour through peer pressures. This is
typical of a bureaucratic form of organisation. This mode of organising and 
173
regulation would typically be found in the top right hand quadrant of the grid group
matrix.
If group is strong but grid is weak then boundaries are clear cut, mutually
exclusive, boundary maintenance mechanisms are strong and group identity has a
powerful influence on behaviour through reputational mechanisms and implied
sanctions. The group is divided into insiders and outsiders and operates
mechanisms of inclusion and exclusion that can be economic, social or cultural.
However, weak grid means that within the boundaries of the group there is little
internal differentiation, with few status distinctions demarcating appropriate
behaviour. Those rules that do exist are tacit as well as formal based upon shared
understandings and preferences for distinct sets of values.
This type of social organisation is typical of what Douglas refers to as an
egalitarian system or sometimes as sect or enclave in her original versions. In
further-higher education it refers to a collegial mode of organisation rather than a
hierarchal or managerialist one with strong professional, occupational or network
based sources of identity that transcend individual organisations.
When grid is weak and group is weak there are few rules. Roles are fluid and
negotiable and social actors exercise considerable choice. There are few clearly
demarcated groups or if there are boundaries of groups are fluid and permeable.
This type of social organisation is associated with individualistic forms of social
organisation typically found in entrepreneurial, competitive and market based
economies. The general direction of policy change in further-higher education has 
174
according to many been towards this lower left hand quadrant represented by the
entrepreneurial organisation operating in an increasingly marketised institutional
environment.
The fatalist or isolate way of organising is strong grid and weak group. Roles are
clear cut, highly differentiated and insulated from others and rules are
unambiguous with little room for discretion in behaviour. As group is weak and
group identity either unimportant or highly fluid it carries little impact on its ability to
organise around issues or group interests. It occupies what Weber would call a
weak market situation. There is little capacity for organisation in this way of
organising beyond the minimum. Unlike the other quadrants which represent active
modes of organising this is a passive quadrant. However incumbents of this
quadrant either in the form of organisational or individual actors are important for
understanding the isomorphic pressures towards conforming to external policy
transformations inasmuch as interpreting policy may involve reinterpreting it to
produce perverse incentives or patterns of resistance or strategic inactivity.
Moreover, the power of different organisational actors to oppose or align with
policy change has to be understood relationally to include those actors who are
relatively powerless.
Sometimes a fifth type of grid group combination is identified, the hermit. This
stands outside of the other forms of social organising and is a kind of form of
retreatism or dropping out. This type is not considered in this analysis. 
175
Thus the grid group matrix can be divided into the four main quadrants shown
above. These refer to preferences for or orientation to a particular mode of
organising rather than any strict deterministic linkage between grid and group.
They also all coexist in a state of tension, complementariness, or conflict at any
one time. One may dominate but shifts between quadrants may occur with policy
change or other events.
These links between the ‘cultural biases’ as Douglas calls them that typify the grid
dimension and the concrete patterns of social relations or modes of organising
linking organisational actors in an organisational field consist of both formal and
informal aspects. These links can also be either functional or dysfunctional.
For a mode of organisation to be viable it must be perceived as being viable. That
means grid must be in some form of reciprocal or mutually reinforcing functional
relationship with group. If the two dimensions are compatible in this sense then
they are said to constitute viable ‘ways of life’. On the other hand if they are
incompatible then they are liable to become unstable or generate conflict or
tensions. They will not be viable ‘ways of life’. This explanation can equally cope
with the generation of dysfunctional behaviour as well as functional.
In the instance of the individualist quadrant the transactions are based upon the
market, contract and the price mechanism in its pure form. Empirically at the
further-higher education interface what operates are quasi-markets rather than
pure markets. However, perceptions of market behaviour and competitive
individualism and entrepreneurial strategising within the quadrant are real if they 
176
are perceived as real. Hence the incentive structures, preferences or ‘cultural
biases’ associated with market behaviour will be reflected in the acts of transacting
exchanges among member groups. One dysfunctional aspect of introducing
market mechanisms it has been argued is that it can generate a low trust
environment that undermines partnership.
The diagonally opposite hierarchical quadrant is more recognisable as a
bureaucratic form of organisation. Here clearly demarcated roles arranged in a
status hierarchy with clear lines of authority and reporting structures will be the
norm. Rules and procedures are followed by the book and there is little ambiguity
surrounding their application. This was typical of many of the structures associated
with the old public administration of public sector organisations. A dysfunctional
aspect of this quadrant is it is rigid and cannot cope with change or be effective
where innovation is necessary.
The egalitarian or enclave quadrant is more typical of network based, collaborative
or partnership forms of organising. Typically voluntary organisations, community
based ones or other forms of intermediate or third sector organisations would
occupy this quadrant. Egalitarianism and lateral authority structures based upon
reputation or common goals or communities of practice may exist. The boundaries
of the member organisations are likely to be strong but they may join with other
discrete organisations to pursue common goals. This could arguably be referred to
as an example of ‘joined up’ government. A dysfunctional aspect of this quadrant is
that decision making processes are slow and there is a tendency towards schism. 
177
The fatalist quadrant is often functional for the other quadrants as a possible
source of new recruits or as a repository for expelled or non compliant groups. It is
dysfunctional in the sense that it lacks a coherent ability to organise genuine
protest or express a voice.
Collaboration between HE and further-higher providers may produce hybrid
organisational forms that have a foot in more than one quadrant. Rather than a
pure form of cooperation it is as likely that co-opetition (Brandenburger and
Nalebuff, 1996) is the norm here with organisations sometimes collaborating and
sometimes competing ( e.g., a mixture of individualism and egalitarianism among
partnerships). This was certainly the case in the early days of franchising when
FECs and the new universities might both find themselves with a tradition of
delivering HNC’s and HND’s sometimes in direct competition while collaborating in
providing degree provision. Competition could also exist within sectors while
collaboration took place across sectors.
The intersection of the grid and group matrix constitutes a locus of control and
coordination that helps us understand who has control over the disposition of
resources and over whom in the further-higher education organisational field
holistically and relationally at a systems level. The organisational providers of
further-higher education in this field are legally autonomous and independent
corporations that are in a semi-compulsory inter-organisational collaboration that is
defined by a bilateral dependency and high to medium levels of asset specificity.
However, these have to be contextualised as processes unfolding against a
context. 
178
Whichever mechanisms operate, and more than one is likely to be operating at any
one time, there is no one explanation of how control over the allocation of resource
and the connections between control and coordination mechanisms is totally
dominated by any one way of organising. This is the central argument made by
Hood (1998) in his analysis of public administration using the cultural theory
approach evolved from Douglas.
Hood’s point was that there is no one best way of organising in public life. Plural
rationalities or ‘cultural biases’ exist that reflect the prevailing social relations in
which they are reciprocally embedded. For each of these rationalities, which he
equates with Douglas’ quadrants of individualism, hierarchy, egalitarianism or
enclave and fatalism or isolation, there are a corresponding preferred structure of
control and coordination. If applied to further-higher education similar complex
mixtures complementing or conflicting with each other are liable to exist in tension
within the organisational field.
In the individualistic, entrepreneurial quadrant of weak grid and weak group it is
control through competition and coordination through the market. In the hierarchy
quadrant of strong grid and strong group it is control through oversight and
coordination through formal rule following. In the egalitarian or enclave quadrant
control is exercised through mutuality and coordination through reciprocal
obligations. And in the fatalist or isolate quadrant it is control via contrived
randomness and coordination by default. 
179
Coexisting plural rationalities and preferences for ways of organising and
controlling the public sector may complement or undermine each other. Thus these
different forms of governance are mutually interdependent and often coexist in
tension. The shift from one dominant mode of organising to another tends to be
cyclical as the functional and dysfunctional aspects of different modes of
organising emerge over time. If any one mode of organising becomes too
dominant then there will tend to be instability for the viability of any one way of
organising is dependent upon others for its success.
Hood’s application of Douglas’ grid group model associates particular ways of
organising and regulating public life with complementary control structures (see
table 6.1). The hierarchal quadrant typical of a bureaucratic form of organising is
best regulated through what he calls bossism or control by oversight. The
egalitarian or enclave quadrant of the bottom right quadrant he refers to as control
through groupism or mutuality. The bottom left quadrant of the individualist control
through choiceisim or competition. The top left fatalist quadrant he labels as control
through chanceism or contrived randomness.
CHOICEISM
CONTRIVED RANDOMNESS
BOSSISM
OVERSIGHT
CHOICEISM
COMPETITION
GROUPISM
MUTUALITY
Table 6.1 
180
Bossism or control by oversight is associated with hierarchy and would typically
include systems of inspection or audit. In reality proto-hierarchy would be a better
term for these are rarely direct structures of hierarchal oversight and are more
commonly indirect forms of control are associated with NPM type reforms. In
further-higher education oversight is through indirect means through audit and
quality assurance procedures.
Choiceism refers to control through market mechanisms. Mechanisms such as
league tables, performance indicators and targets are the preferred means
whereby these mechanisms operate. They are meant to prioritise competition and
utilise market mechanisms as a means of directing organisational behaviour and
structuring the incentives and preferences that typify a neo-liberal market
economy. As mentioned earlier the further-higher organisational field constitutes a
balkanised sector with its own internal status hierarchy that reflects the nature of
the ‘product’ as a positional good.
Groupism and control through mutuality exposes organisations to peer group
pressure and reputation mechanisms that can generate isomorphic pressures to
conform to sector norms. In further-higher education a mix of collegiality, peer
review and managerialism tend to coexist. Never the less in further-higher
education a major shift has occurred away from the more competitive practices
associated with the early days of franchising during the era of ‘low policy’ towards
a collaborative or co-opetition based set of practices that regulate through complex
and embedded mutually dependent networks of organisations in the further-higher
organisational field. 
181
Fatalism is associated with contrived randomness. The fatalist organisation does
not actively engage at the core of the organisational field but tends to be found at
the margins and is consequently relatively powerless to influence policy. They
react to policy transformation rather than engage in shaping it.
Thus coordination mechanisms based upon the market, hierarchy and egalitarian
governance structures will comprise the three active quadrants while the passive
fatalist or isolate quadrant is distinct because of its inability to organise.
Nevertheless the other quadrants rely on this passive quadrant both as a source of
potential recruits and as a compliant inversion of the active quadrants. This is a
relational model and all quadrants coexist at anyone time; hence they cannot be
dealt with in isolation except for analytical purposes.
Hood argues that these different ways of organising and controlling and
coordinating always coexist in tension and indeed the complement each other and
need each other as a balance to the potential excesses and dysfunctions that
would result from any one becoming too dominant. The viability of any one way of
organising is thus dependent on all the others.
If this approach were to be applied to further-higher education the phase of ‘low
policy’ can be understood as one that coexisted with the introduction of NPM
techniques which led to the dominance of one particular way of organising
particularly in FECs. This was a neo-taylorist version of either hard or soft 
182
managerialism (Trowler, 1998) that combined elements of hierarchy with
individualism.
This tension between the individualism and hierarchy diagonal appears
contradictory. The decentralising tendencies of the individualistic quadrant and the
centralising and standardising tendencies of the hierarchical quadrant would
appear to generate countervailing forces and tensions. Yet this diagonal accurately
represents the paradoxes and anomalies that typified further-higher education
delivery with the shift to marketisation and devolution of decision making and the
concurrent implementation of managerialism that represented centralisation and
standardisation.
In this sense this managerialist shift was based upon the right to manage and the
restructuring of further-higher education along private sector lines and a the move
towards private sector incentives based upon the market or quasi-markets with the
central imposition of standardised targets and performance indicators by
government through agencies or quangos. The blurring of the public private sector
division marked a move down group but up grid in this context (in other words
towards weaker group but stronger grid). It was associated with reforms linked to
the implementation of NPM and managerialism in further-higher education.
The blurring of FE and HE boundaries also marked a weakening of group
inasmuch as the different organisational cultures, institutional logics professional
histories and different organisational structures were to come under pressures to
reposition themselves across the further-higher education divide. 
183
With the era of ‘high policy’ post Dearing and the introduction of direct funding,
consortium arrangements and a more structured and strategic approach to other
forms of collaboration the question of whether the pressure would be to follow FE
models of provisioning or HE models or some further-higher education hybrid of
the two became more pressing. The strong sector loyalties and continuing
influence of sector identities among further-higher education providers (Parry,
2008, Smith, 2008) was to retain considerable influence on decision making in
further-higher education .
The mix of different ways of organising and different preferences and incentive
structures founded upon different ‘cultural biases’ to which participating
organisation were subject increased and complicated coordination problems. While
plural authority structures coexisted in a system of institutional duality at the end of
the day the power lay with the HE provider in whose name the qualification was
granted.
Pressures based upon a mix of coercive isomorphism and normative therefore
dominated the transition to ‘high policy’. Mimetic pressure are more likely to
operate in situations were FECs revert to what they know in the tail of increased
uncertainty originating in learning the ‘rules of the game’ of HE delivery and
responding to new funding and quality assurance masters.
There is a danger that excessive reliance on an FE model or on an HE model may
become dysfunctional. The synergies and advantages of further-higher education 
184
delivery may be compromised if one control system dominates over the others. As
Hood argues there may be no one best way of organising. Applying this to the
further-higher education interface managing the better of two ’cultural biases’ in FE
and HE and avoiding the worst may be the way forward. An overly compliant FE
sector operating a hard managerialist ethos is likely to stifle creativity and
innovation. Yet the creation of an HE environment on the model of an HE provider
is not possible in further-higher education given the irreversible shifts towards
massification of HE and the different resourcing issues and terms and conditions
under which FE staff work.
This is not just a cliché of FE as an example of a fordist mass production model of
educational delivery versus a collegiate and professionalized post fordist HE
model. The reality is far more complex with hybrids of both coexisting.
Paradoxically the smaller groups and more teaching focused FE model generates
a further-higher education ethos that is student centred and personalised with high
levels of support but tends to operate through organisational structures that are
managerialist and fordist.
It is the hybrid nature of further-higher education that makes it distinctive. These
are examples of ‘clumsy institutions’ (Verweij, 2006) that can accommodate the
institutional duality of further-higher education through accommodating plural
modes of operation within one hybrid organisational form. Countervailing pressures
towards isomorphism as predicted by new institutionalism coexist with divergent
processes towards a model of further-higher education delivery whose features are
not yet clear. This is complicated by the institutional duality of further-higher 
185
education. It is at and across the boundaries of further-higher education that policy
transformation is mutating. The grid-group model alert an analysis towards these
coexisting and competing plural FE and HE rationalities and the tensions and
anomalies they can generate.
Table 6.2 is an attempt to represent a set of processes and is not a static model. It
is designed to capture the processes whereby shifts in grid and group can be
triangulated to move beyond simple dichotomies and to ensure a more in depth
understanding of institutional and organisational changes that have taken place at
the further-higher interface. The use of grid group as a heuristic device maps the
potential trajectories of change in systems of regulation through the grid dimension
and the configuration of boundaries in further-higher education.
The categorisation and classification of the organisational field that constitutes both
further-higher education and HE within one system also allows the capturing of
anomalies and ambiguity at those interstitial points where ‘matter out of place’ can
be found. These are weak points in the structural arrangements of the furtherhigher
organisational field and designate the fault lines at which the tensions at the
further-higher education interface are most likely to be found.
By utilising the grid-group heuristic a system of classification such as is found in
further-higher education and HE can be considered holistically and in terms of
anomalies and ambiguities in the system that reflect deeper structural factors and
weaknesses and strengths. Such a holistic approach indicates a more deep
rooted issue. 
186
This chapter has attempted to construct a theoretical account of policy
transformation in further-higher education through the use of Douglas’ grid group
model. This has functioned as a heuristic device to trace the gradual shifts,
transformations and institutional and organisational reconfigurations that
characterised this period. It supplies a conceptual framework through which the
decisions, strategies, preferences and positioning strategies of organisational
actors in the further-higher organisational field can be explored and its institutional
duality investigated.
Y(+)
Fatalism
(isolated atomism)
Apathy
Ritualism
Isolation
Peripheral
RISK/UNCERTAINTY
Risk as a random lottery
Hierarchy
(bureaucracy and hierarchical
organisational structures)
Rule following
Standardisation
Status orders (Positionality)
Centralisation and formalisation
RISK/UNCERTAINTY
Risk averse
Individualism
(negotiation, bargaining, dealers at
the stock exchange)
Markets
Entrepreneurship
Discovery processes
Structural holes
RISK/UNCERTAINTY
Risk as opportunity to exploit
Egalitarianism
(community of practices, research
networks, disciplinary cultures)
Mutuality
Networks
Clans
Enclaves
RISK/UNCERTAINTY
Pooling risk as an insurance policy
 Y(-)
 X (-) X(+)
 Table 6.2
187
The grid-group heuristic has been used as an analytical device for tracking both
the trajectories of institutional and organisational change at the further-higher
education interface over twenty years and a means of identifying the role of
anomaly and ambiguity in systems of classification and the emergence of hybrid
organisational forms that are internalising the institutional duality of further-higher
education. 
188
CHAPTER SEVEN: EXCHANGES AT THE ENGLISH
FURTHER-HIGHER INTERFACE
The last chapter used the grid-group matrix as a heuristic device for
conceptualising the direction of institutional and organisational change in furtherhigher
education. At the same time it helped identify some of the anomalies,
tensions and ambiguities that were found in further-higher education as
consequence of its inherent institutional duality. These transitions have been
conceptualised as processes situated in a context of sometimes turbulent and
persistent change. In this chapter the shifting configurations of transactions and
exchanges across sector and inter-organisational boundaries are analysed in
terms of how they become institutionalised as practice.
In further-higher education transactions and exchanges at the further-higher
interface are subject to different institutional logics and sector legacies. This
chapter therefore explores different models of how transactions and exchanges
can be understood, contextualised and conceptualised as the outcome of
processes that reflect the institutional duality of further-higher education. It draws
largely on a modified version of transaction cost economics drawn from new
institutionalist economics that incorporates an analysis of transactions that
contextualises them in the wider political economy in which they are embedded. 
189
The structural characteristics of exchanges at the further-higher interface and how
they are actually aligned to the institutional arrangements that oversee them are
therefore considered both as context and as process. These are explored within a
framework that builds upon the grid-group heuristic that was introduced in the
previous chapter as a heuristic device for setting the context for understanding how
transactions are regulated. Of specific interest are the boundaries and interfaces
found at the site of disjunctures of practice between further-higher education and
HE providers and the boundary work that takes place there.
Transactions and exchanges at the further-higher interface and exchanges within
the organisational field are both horizontal and vertical being subject to different
institutional pressures at any one point in time. The grid dimension has captured
the vertical elements of these exchanges while the group dimension has captured
the horizontal. Through combining them in various mixes of modes of organising
and coordination the grid-group matrix can be used as a device for encapsulating
this process of hybridisation. The context through which these transactions are
configured across sector and inter-organisational boundaries will be considered
here in terms of the structural attributes of transactions and specifically through the
concept of asset specificity and how they can be understood in the context of the
institutional arrangements that oversee and regulate exchanges.
All transactions in further-higher education are aligned through institutional
arrangements or specific governance structures that are framed by the macro
institutional environment of further-higher education that determines the ‘rules of
the game’. The macro level of the institutional environment is in turn mediated at 
190
the meso level by the further-higher organisational field which in aggregate
constitutes the outcome of a process of institutionalisation of the sum of
transactions and exchanges and that have collectively and in aggregate become
embedded as practices in the field.
Indeed an organisational field only exists to the extent that it is institutionalised.
The micro level of organisational preference formation and incentive structures and
positioning of organisational decision makers in further-higher education is then
contextualised against the backdrop of a contest over resource deployment and of
assets within further-higher education and across sector boundaries.
In combination this iteration of macro, meso and micro level processes constitutes
the broad context in which the institutional duality of further-higher education is
mediated and filtered and the further-higher interface configured through the
institutionalisation and embedding of transactions and exchanges within the
organisational field.
Three key analytical questions are posed in this chapter. Firstly, what are the core
structural attributes of transactions and exchanges that are embedded at the
further-higher interface? Secondly, what are the relationships of transactions
across the further-higher interface considered as embedded relational processes
to the institutional and organisational contexts in which they are embedded?
Finally, what is the relationship between the transactions, the institutional
environment, institutional arrangements or governance structures and the hybrid 
191
organisational forms found in further-higher education and how can they be
contextualised and conceptualised?
Cases and Transactions
Following Yin (1989) it was argued in chapter three that the case study method is
best suited to exploring a unique case (in this example further-higher education
transactions across the further-higher interface) against the actual natural setting in
which it takes place. Here the transaction has been identified as the unit of
analysis and the period between 1988 and 2008 delimits the parameters of the
‘case’.
Transactions and exchanges at the further-higher interface are explored here as
processes against their institutional and organisational contexts during a period of
continual and turbulent change.
While the previous chapter attempted to trace and contextualise the trajectories of
institutional and organisational change through the heuristic device of grid and
group this chapter locates further-higher education transactions against a
conceptual framework that investigates those hybrid organisational forms and
institutional arrangements that constitute the boundary configurations of furtherhigher
education. Then transactions and exchanges are considered in terms of a
wider political economy. The boundary work that takes place at the further-higher
interface, and the role and function of the boundary organisations that are situated
there, are then investigated in the following chapter. 
192
The Further-Higher Interface
Transactions at the further-higher interface are characterised by a number of
distinct structural features and attributes. Essentially, these structural attributes
consist of bilaterally dependent transactions and exchanges in which transactions
are embedded in specific social, political, cultural and ideological contexts. These
combine to institutionalise and hence channel the behaviour and preferences of
organisations and organisational decision makers across sector and interorganisational
boundaries. Before analysing the core theoretical attributes and
characteristics of these exchanges some key aspects of transactions within furtherhigher
education are first introduced.
Firstly the transaction takes place across organisational boundaries and different
sub-sectors of the further-higher organisational field and this is inherently a
collaborative, relational and reciprocal exchange. Consequently the institutional
framework that regulates further-higher education and the organisations that are
embedded in it cannot be understood in isolation. Transactions take place within a
context and not in isolation and are processual and not static phenomenon. They
are part of an instituted process through which they become embedded as
practices and institutionalised in concrete organisational forms and settings
Within these further-higher transactional configurations are the various
organisational forms including but not exclusively: franchising, consortiums,
validation arrangements, licensing arrangements, networks and joint planning 
193
arrangements. Some of these are directly funded and some are indirectly funded.
The boundaries of these organisational forms are inherently problematic in
theoretical terms due to the relational nature of organisational collaborations.
Boundary maintenance, boundary setting and boundary spanning functions and
the growing importance of external linkages between organisations and other
agencies in further-higher education all require adequate conceptualisation. These
are dealt with in more detail in chapter Eight.
The point about these diverse collaborative relations is that the inter-organisational
transaction that defines them is subject to a process of hybridisation and consists
of a bundle of transactional attributes that transcend the boundaries of individual
organisations. Oversight, control and coordination of the transaction takes place
through institutional mechanisms that have been imposed to varying degrees by
the central state through its agencies that act as intermediaries or boundary
organisations at the further-higher interface. Understanding the dynamics of these
institutional forces requires a longitudinal approach that captures the processes
whereby organisations become infused with values but have to cope with the
tensions created as a consequence of the institutional duality of further-higher
education.
Transactions as Instituted Processes
The institutional and organisational contexts in which further-higher education
transactions are embedded are analysed in this section using neo-institutional
theory and specifically its sociological variant as a conceptual framework for 
194
organising an understanding of the attributes of transactions and exchanges found
in further-higher education. The role of institutions and institutionalisation for
understanding further-higher exchanges at the interface is placed at the centre of
this framework. In particular the impact of institutional duality on these processes is
then considered.
As indicated in a previous chapter and following North’s definition (1990)
institutions constitute the ‘rules of the game’ and organisations are the ‘players’ of
the game. Institutions consist of the formal and informal rules that structure human
interaction and provide stability and reduce uncertainty through the reproduction of
recurrent patterns of predictable behaviour.
The Conceptual Framework
The conceptual framework used in this section is drawn from a mix of neoinstitutional
theory and in particular sociological institutionalism, new institutionalist
economics and a political economy approach that links the economic, social,
cultural and political dimensions of transactions and exchanges at the furtherhigher
interface across macro, meso and micro levels.
Neo-institutionalism in the guise of sociological institutionalism emphasises that
transactions are embedded in social relations and cognitive frameworks that
impose meaning on exchanges. The use of the grid-group heuristic complemented
this approach through matching organisational preference formation to patterns of 
195
economic and social organisation in further-higher education and the wider social
structure.
The strength of new institutionalist economics lies in its focus upon the relationship
between the transactions that govern particular economic interactions and the
preferences and incentive structures of organisations, actors and agencies who
are party to the transaction. Principal agent theory considers the problem of how to
align preferences and what happens if the incentives of principals and agents are
incongruent. As both the further-higher transactions and the incentives that shape
the interface are structured through institutions and organisations that has changed
radically.
However, the weakness of new institutionalist economics lies in its a-social
concept of economic man and in the lack of context it provides for understanding
the economic behaviour that is embedded in broader institutional contexts and
social relations. It lacks a concept of the embeddedness of economic behaviour or
its historical antecedents. In combination with a political economy approach the
contextual, situational and macro structural impact of marketisation and
massification of HE and its impact on further-higher education needs to be
considered to provide a rounded analysis of its ecology.
As it is the transaction that is the theoretical unit of analysis, the new institutional
economic legacy is first explored before developing an alternative and
complementary theoretical and conceptual framework that investigates the
institutional and organisational processes whereby transactions become 
196
embedded as concrete social relations and result in organisations positioning
themselves in the organisational field. This approach then contextualises the
dynamics of the transaction against the social, political, cultural, structural,
historical and ideological contexts in which the transaction is embedded
This analytic strategy owes a great deal to the work of Granovetter (1985) on the
embeddedness of economic action in social relations and the work of economic
anthropologists and economic sociologists (Swedberg, 2005). Their work on the
relationship between the economic and social embeddedness of economic
behaviour in non market economies has been extremely fruitful in analysing the
further-higher interface. This analysis of the iteration of economic, social and
political dimensions of further-higher education through a sociological lens argues
that understanding economic behaviour needs to be premised on an
understanding of the institutional and social contexts through which it this
behaviour is filtered.
Embedded transactions and exchanges across the interface and the organisations
that populate the further-higher organisational field are typified by the possession
of and production and reproduction of asymmetrical relations of power and
dependency at a number of analytical levels. In this process the differences in the
various traditions, cultures, organisational structures and access to resources by
collaborating partners and organisations can lead to tensions. There are also
issues around the difficulties of measurement, monitoring and coordinating
complex structured collaborative arrangements such as these. 
197
This makes a pure market model of transactional behaviour in which commodities
are traded and priced through the market as problematic, as it is in many public
sector areas of service delivery. No real price mechanism operates in furtherhigher
education as in a pure market model. The existence of quasi-markets (Le
Grand and Bartlett, 1993) in further-higher education, or managed markets
(Ranson, 1994), in which the price mechanism is missing, compounds these
complex problems of control and coordination. These issues are explored in more
depth when the analytical purchase of the model developed in part two will be
demonstrated through illustrations of significant events in the evolution and
maturation of the organisational field in which further-higher education is
embedded.
For policy makers the degree to which further-higher provision is defined as a
public good, a merit good1
 rather than a private one that contributes to national
economic well being means that the central state is highly directive in its policy
making. Further-higher education thus represents part of a stock of the nation’s
human capital. The further-higher transaction, therefore, is subject to many
institutional pressures from external regulators, funding bodies and other
stakeholders that generate a complex dynamic within the organisational field. The
need for public accountability is one of the most important aspects of this. Many of
these pressures can conflict and the role of the sector in building up the nation’s
human capital and responding to the changing needs of work employers and the
public purse strings makes it subject to paradox, ambiguity and tensions.

1
 A merit good is something that is considered desirable by policy makers and in order to ensure its
provision a suspension of the price mechanism may be necessary. Education is often considered to be
an example of a merit good because it benefits its recipients but they are not necessarily knowledgeable
about those benefits. A public good is something that everyone benefits from such as a park or clean
air. The term merit good was initially introduced by Musgrave (1959). 
198
Transaction Cost Economics
Transaction cost economics argues that there are various costs incurred in any
economic transaction and the coordination of these exchanges through specific
institutional arrangements or governance structures functions to reduce these
costs. The reduction of transaction costs therefore can be achieved through the
adoption of the most appropriate institutional arrangements that match the
attributes of the transaction. Although somewhat of a functionalist argument and an
example of a paradigm based upon a fundamental methodological individualism
transaction cost economics, when combined with a more sociological approach
that incorporates an understanding of the economy as an instituted process and
political economy, is a useful starting point for investigating transactions and interorganisational
collaboration at the further-higher interface.
Williamson (1975, 1981 1985), one of the seminal thinkers in the transaction cost
economics tradition, effectively uses a comparative framework that compares the
transaction costs of operating under one governance structure, usually the market
compared to alternative modes usually incorporating hierarchy, networks, various
hybrids or mixes of these alternatives. The preferred governance structure
according to Williamson will be the one that most adequately matches the
transactional attributes of the exchange to the associated governance structure or
institutional arrangements. The most efficient match will in turn minimise
transaction costs. 
199
Applied to further-higher education, transaction cost economics would consider the
most ‘efficient’ organisational form for achieving these goals. The existence of
hybrid organisational forms in further-higher education poses an interesting
question. What is their role and function in widening participation and access to
HE: and what can an analysis of those transactions typically found embedded at
the further-higher interface tell us about further-higher education as a sub
component of a super-ordinate system of traditional HE? Do they reduce or
increase transaction costs and how can hybrid transactions be conceptualised?
In order to try to address some of these issues the transactions and exchanges
configured at the further-higher interface are explored through a modified variant of
transaction cost economics that places transactions in a wider context and
explores the process of embeddedness whereby they become institutionalised as
practice often through a process of hybridisation.
Transaction cost economics usually identifies four core components of
transactions: asset specificity, frequency, uncertainty and small numbers
bargaining and makes a number of behavioural assumptions about the economic
agents engaged in transacting that include the assumption that decision makers
are subject to bounded rationality and opportunism or self seeking with guile.
Asset specificity
The concept of asset specificity is generally considered to be the key transactional
attribute in transaction costs theory. Asset specificity refers to durable relationship-
200
specific investments that are tied in some way to the transacting parties through a
bilaterally dependent relation. In the further-higher education organisational field all
transactions exhibit relatively high degrees of asset specificity because they are by
definition collaborative arrangements that tie each organisation or agency into
some form of mutual dependency. Further-higher education is premised upon a
bilateral dependent and semi-compulsory inter-organisational collaborative
organisational form that is embedded in specific institutional environments. The link
between autonomy and control in further-higher education collaboration is never a
simple or straightforward one but will vary with a range of factors.
Further-higher education partnerships exhibit medium to high levels of asset
specificity while the process whereby further-higher education is delivered provides
a service that is often tacit and difficult to measure and monitor. Typically furtherhigher
education is understood to offer high levels of pastoral support, smaller
group sizes and a more supportive ethos that favours non traditional HE students.
These are not easily transferable to the differing context of traditional HE.
According to Williamson (1985) there are a number of components or dimensions
of asset specificity that are significant in transaction cost economics. Some of the
more significant of these include site asset specificity, dedicated asset specificity,
physical asset specificity, brand name capital, temporal asset specificity and
human asset specificity. This is not an exhaustive list and others could be
meaningful depending on context. In further-higher education some of the more
theoretically significant are linked to site asset specificity, human asset specificity, 
201
brand name capital and temporal asset specificity. These are outlined in the table
below.
Dimensions of Asset Specificity
Human Asset Specificity
Extent of qualifications, ethos, pedagogic style and pastoral support available.
Site Asset Specificity
Linked to location and ease of access. Local access prioritised.
Brand Name Capital
Power to validate HE awards. Reputation and status of brand.
Dedicated Asset Specificity
Jointly designed and resourced facilities.
Physical Asset Specificity
Provision of IT or library facilities available to FHE students.
Temporal Asset Specificity
Transfer function of FHE. ‘Cooling out’ or ‘warming up’ function.
Table 7.0
Site asset specificity is tied up with location and geography. To the extent that a
transaction is site specific it is obviously difficult to deliver it elsewhere. Many
further-higher education collaborations are site specific. Yet a more intangible
aspect than the issue of physical proximity and the local access orientation of
further-higher education is the pedagogic and pastoral strengths of further-higher
education and the claims it provides a highly supportive pastoral setting. This
reduces the cultural and psychological distance some non traditional students
perceive to exist in alternative forms of provision. For example many mature and
non traditional students may find the ethos and smaller scale of delivery in further-
202
higher education preferable to a larger traditional partner university. Parry et al
(2002, 2004) in trying to identify what is distinctive to further-higher education
argues it is its ethos, scale and pedagogy as much as its structures that make it
distinctive. Students’ personal and domestic ties and in the case of part timers
work commitments may re-enforce this aspect of site specificity.
Dedicated asset specificity is similar to physical asset specificity and refers to plant
or fixed facilities that are associated with delivery. Physical asset specificity refers
to something that is distinct to an organisation. Dedicated asset specificity refers to
something that is produced jointly and specifically for further-higher education
provision and crosses sector boundaries. Either may include library or IT facilities
and many collaborative structures have complex arrangements about sharing of
resources. These joint arrangements are a frequent source of confusion for
students studying further-higher education when they are studying for the same
qualification of those in the partner HE organisation but with restricted access to its
resources. Often these can be for legal and copyright reasons such as in the
sharing of library facilities.
Human asset specificity is of crucial importance in a labour intensive labour
process such as that of further-higher education. The level of qualification of staff,
the staff development facilities available and the distinct ethos, scale and
pedagogical styles typical of further-higher education make it difficult to deploy
these assets to alternative usage. 
203
The further-higher education labour process is highly distinctive in this sense. The
advantages of further-higher education provision in terms of the smaller class sizes
and reported levels of student support have to be balanced against the higher
teaching loads of further-higher education staff and the extent to which there is
genuine and reciprocal staff development taking place across inter-organisational
boundaries. Pragmatic issues such as time, distance and alternative demands may
preclude this happening. Moreover, there is limited evidence of further-higher
education resourcing the development of a research function or when they do that
this is considered a marginal part of the role of further-higher education. The
teaching based focus of further-higher education, however, is not restricted to
further-higher education. Increasingly other HE providers in the university sector
may specialise in teaching rather than research as funding is concentrated in
greater amounts among fewer providers and mainly in the research intensive
Russell Group.
Brand name capital is another feature of asset specificity in further-higher
education. The HE brand and access to it is a major reason for further-higher
education working collaboratively with an HE provider. While the HE provider is
ultimately responsible for the reputation of its brand through various quality
assurance mechanisms recent legislative changes passed in 2008 have given
further-higher education the power to seek foundation degree awarding powers.
Although at the time of writing none had been granted these powers it is likely that
this marks a significant symbolic and technical shift in access to brand name
capital and that will impact on the asset specificity of further-higher education. The
role and function of the QAA as a boundary organisation that legitimates the HE 
204
brand has become more significant especially during the transition to ‘high policy’
post Dearing.
Another dimension of asset specificity is temporal asset specificity. The role and
function of further-higher education as a provider of new entrants for HE has a long
established history. This transfer function appears to be more complex than at first
appears. Recent research from the FurtherHigher project suggests that not all
students who study in a further-higher education setting progress within the same
provider or necessarily move to a higher qualification and that the transfer function
and a decision to move is mediated through a range of other factors related to the
institutional and organisational habitus of both the further-higher education and
university HE provider (Parry et al, 2008). Foundation degrees in particular offer a
terminal qualification. Moreover, further-higher education can take the form of a
‘waiting room’ experience whereby students may be ‘warmed up’ or ‘cooled out’ to
use Clark’s (1960) phrase and their aspirations modified in transit.
Asset Specificity as Hybridisation
The usefulness of the concept of asset specificity is that it offers a more refined
tool than dualistic conceptualisations of FE and HE and helps captures the
nuances whereby the further-higher interface is configured. It is the mix or
combinations of asset specificity contextualised in concrete settings and
configurations at the further-higher interface that matters. These vary according to
context, situation and setting. However, what most further-higher organisational
forms have in common with respect to their provision is that mixes of asset 
205
specificity take place across sector and inter-organisational boundaries that create
a hybridised type of further-higher education provision. Franchising is one such
hybrid form mixing elements of FE and HE within one organisational setting.
These hybrid organisational forms can therefore offer a more flexible type of
provision able to cross inter-organisational boundaries while maintaining
organisational autonomy and identity at the same time. Thus boundaries can be
both permeable and permissible but also persist and are re-enforced at the furtherhigher
interface through strong sector identities and loyalties.
Uncertainty
Together these components of asset specificity are considered to be the crucial
attribute of the transaction. However, the degree of uncertainty under which a
transaction takes place is also important. In further-higher education the concept is
complicated by virtue of the duality of the institutional environment and
arrangements found in further-higher education. This can create anomalies and
ambiguities in the operations and transactions and exchanges that take place
across the further-higher interface. At this point it is important to make a technical
distinction between uncertainty and risk, terms that are often used inter
changeably. In the economics literature risk can generally be assigned a value or
rather a probability and to some extent can be measured. This, for example, is how
actuaries operate in the insurance business. On the other hand uncertainty cannot
be measured: it is a qualitative condition and perception. Transaction cost
economics uses the term uncertainty to capture this ambiguity. Risk is calculable 
206
and can be assigned a probability at least in theory. Throughout this thesis the
terms are used inter changeably at times. That usage has been retained for the
sake of clarity.
As uncertainty cannot be easily measured an organisation’s perceptions,
preferences and incentive structures are best understood as socially and culturally
constructed. It is the iteration between the social construction of preferences and
incentive structures that Douglas’ grid-group heuristic has been used to capture. It
is the function of institutions to reduce uncertainty and enhance predictability;
hence the grid group heuristic developed in an earlier chapter is utilised to
conceptualise these institutional processes and their impact on organisational
strategies and how the categorisation of further-higher education as a system of
classification becomes institutionalised.
Bearing the technical distinction between risk and uncertainty in mind,
organisations that are described as ‘risk averse’ may be better described as
uncertainty avoiding. However, using the conventional term ‘risk averse’ furtherhigher
education deliverers may spread risk or delegate it through a collaborative
arrangement such as franchising. Indeed, in some cases this is what happened in
the early post incorporation days of further-higher education franchising when a
small number of universities withdrew from franchise agreements at short notice in
order to respond to a changing and volatile policy environment in a typically short
term reactive response. Diversification as a response may be a form of risk
aversion while uncertainty avoidance may be dealt with by establishing long term 
207
relational contracts with trusted partners. Effective collaborative arrangements
cannot be built up overnight.
Frequency
The third structural attribute of transactions and exchanges at the further-higher
interface is the frequencies with which transactions take place. The frequency of
transactions is a key factor that transaction cost economics suggest need to be
taken into account in engaging in inter-organisational collaboration. The longer
lasting the collaboration the more likely that types of relational contracting and a
common understanding is likely to evolve across inter-organisational boundaries.
Transactions are likely to become more solidaristic and embedded the more
frequent and habitual a transaction or exchange is. This is because an evidence
base and trust based upon reputational factors will be more accessible than would
be the case in the early days of collaborative arrangements in which partners are
relatively unknown quantities.
A more frequent transaction is more likely to become embedded in recurrent and
institutionalised practices which results in a reduction of uncertainty, enhances
predictability and leads to shared understanding and meaning systems among the
incumbents of the further-higher organisational field. Joint staff development
events, regular academic joint committees, exam boards or boards of study can all
perform this function. Embedding such boundary work in practice is more likely to
ensure effective collaborative working. 
208
As an organisational field matures, according to the neo-institutionalist analysis of
DiMaggio and Powell (1983, 1991) increased frequency of interaction and an
increase in the information load circulating among members of a field are likely to
enhance the possibility of a common meaning system evolving across the furtherhigher
divide.
Small numbers bargaining
Williamson also refers to the small bargaining problem by which he means that in
situations where high levels of asset specificity exists between two or a small
number of transacting partners there is a greater risk of one or more of the
transacting parties acting opportunistically. Competitive mechanisms are not
effective in such situations and where asset specificity is high.
One strategy adopted by some further-higher education deliverers was to operate
with multiple partners. This raises the transaction costs of coordination and
monitoring but reduce uncertainty by spreading ‘risk’. The Dearing report
recommended that this should not be the typical arrangement. Some further-higher
education deliverers went down this route despite this recommendation to enhance
their bargaining power and many further-higher education providers have multiple
partners as do HE. 
209
Behavioural Assumptions: Shaping Organisational Preferences
The a-priori behavioural assumptions transaction cost economics makes include
those of bounded rationality, opportunism and self seeking with guile. Bounded
rationality has evolved from the work of Simon (1957) and involves an assumption
that no economic agent possesses perfect information or is able to accurately
process such information as is possessed totally efficiently. Cognitive limitations on
the human mind to process very large amounts of information inevitably result in
compromises and the use of rule of thumb to aid decision making. Bounded
rational behaviour is based upon asymmetrical information in other words. There
are other similarities to the concepts developed in principal agent theory in
transaction cost economics, too, including the concepts of moral hazard and
adverse selection.
Opportunism and moral hazard are very similar concepts. Typically moral hazard is
associated with principal agent theory while opportunism with transaction cost
economics. Both are based upon a situation in which uncertainty and asymmetrical
information exists between transacting agents in organisational fields. In principal
agent theory asymmetrical information can generate situations in which the agent
knows more than the principal. This is likely to be the case in the transmission of
high status knowledge that requires lengthy periods of training and professional
socialisation. In such a situation how can the principal monitor the agent’s
behaviour or measure the outputs generated? The nature of the further-higher
education task complicates this because the task is difficult to measure and hence
model. Principal agent theory assumes deductively that moral hazard exists. A 
210
further complication relates to the status of further-higher education as a ‘wicked
problem’. Identifying who is the principal and who is the agent is extremely
complex and cannot make sense except through contextualising these economic
relations against a wider social, cultural and political economy.
Principal Agent Theory
The deliberate alignment of preferences and incentive structures under conditions
of asymmetrical information in which one of the transacting partners, usually the
agent, knows more than the other, the principal, presents an agency problem. It
may well be difficult to observe or monitor or measure the actions of the agent
under these conditions hence incentive structures need to be created that
encourage the agent to act in the interest of the principal. This process of
preference alignment is complicated in a complex institutional environment such as
in further-higher education. When multiple stakeholders and competing interests
coexist as they do in the further-higher organisational field tensions often arise.
Principal agent theory deals with this problem by assuming that it can be reduced
to a set of contractually based principal agent problems.
Thus principal agent theory has evolved within new institutional economics to
address this agency problem. The relationship between the principal and agent is
effectively a formal contract. Multiple principal agent relations are conceptualised
as a series of individual contracts in which the conditions of the contract are
expected to be explicitly and formally codified. This rather one dimensional
analysis tends to ignore the contexts in which agency problems emerge and 
211
ignores the embeddedness of principal agent relations in institutional and
organisational structures. Moreover, non market transaction costs and the informal
dimension of economic organisation are rarely the focus of study in new
institutional economics.
Agency problems need to be understood situationally and relationally and are not
necessarily formal and when more than one organisation is involved they are even
more complex. Often they are based upon relational contracting that evolves with
time and agents cannot specify all possible outcomes as would be the case in a
formal contract. Hence incomplete contracting poses problems for principal agent
theory because the conditions of successful contract completion cannot be
determined in advance. Moreover, the assumptions of agency theorists that are
common to transaction cost theory are associated with a-priori behavioural
assumptions about rationality and opportunism, or in the language of principal
agent theory moral hazard and adverse selection. These are theoretical givens and
not investigated inductively or empirically to establish their truth value.
In particular there is potential for opportunism and moral hazard under conditions
of asymmetrical information. Goal incongruence and organisational dissonance
results when principal and agent do not share the same preferences or respond to
the same incentive structures. Dysfunctional behaviour can result when this occurs
or perverse incentives can be generated that distort the behaviour of agents. After
all, the principal agent problem is effectively one of preference alignment. This may
then result in increased transaction costs. The efficiency argument of transaction
cost economics again is limited because its foundational assumption of rationality 
212
and maximising, albeit relaxed through the introduction of the concept of bounded
rationality, do not in reality situate decision making in its structural context and in
terms of a wider political economy.
Principal agent theory along with transaction cost theory and public choice theory
have been influential in providing a theoretical basis for neo-liberal reforms
instigated in the public sector (see chapter eight). Both transaction costs and
agency problems are significant factors in understanding theoretically the potential
success of these institutional and organisational reforms.
Neo-classical principal agent theory has, of course, addressed this agency
problem in terms of a set of explicit contracts in which the potential for
opportunism, moral hazard and self seeking with guile is prominent. The weakness
of principal agent theory is that it lacks context and tends towards methodological
individualism. This is equally true of transaction cost economics which although it
relaxes the rationality postulate of neo-classical economic theory still retains its
neo-classical edifice. As a purely economic model the social relations and the
institutional and organisational configurations in which the agency problem arises
tend to be missing or lack emphasis in these paradigms.
Principal agent theory does not incorporate a dynamic and diachronic element into
its analytical framework or examine the processual elements of the
institutionalisation process. What is more, in common with principal agent theory,
transaction cost economics tends to ignore history and power and to prioritise one
kind of technical rationality –and additionally emphasises cost containment and 
213
reducing transaction costs as the main theoretical vehicle for explaining the
existence of certain organisational structures and processes.
Emergent Organisational Forms
The question of how institutional forces shape organisational fields and generate
hybrid organisational forms in further-higher education has been dealt with above
through considering the matching of transactional attributes to governance
structures or concrete institutional arrangements. In the transaction cost model an
organisational form exists to reduce transaction costs and provides the most
technically efficient mechanism of coordination. Although this somewhat
deterministic and methodologically individualistic approach is also functionalist in
its stress on the technical economic efficiency with which transactions are aligned
with governance structures, it does recognise that institutions can reduce or
increase transaction costs and places them centre stage.
However, incorporating neo-institutional theory to accentuate the argument that an
organisation may not just seek technical efficiency but also institutional legitimacy
is a necessary adjunct to transaction cost economics. Neo-institutionalist theory
recognises that technical and institutional facets of organisational behaviour can
become decoupled in the performance of the further-higher education task. In
further-higher education institutional duality can create multiple demands at the
further-higher interface rooted in different institutional logics, sector legacies and
preference structures. These preferences need to be historically situated and 
214
contextualised against a political economy approach to understanding furtherhigher
education.
Additionally, what Powell and DiMaggio (1983) term institutional isomorphism is
generally considered to be a significant factor in generating institutional pressures
that push organisations in similar organisational fields towards coercive, normative
and mimetic isomorphism. This is particularly common in public sector
organisations in which the state sets policy goals and sets up the mechanisms to
achieve them because the demands of multiple stakeholders must be
accommodated and responses seen to be legitimate and accountable. Again in
further-higher education these isomorphic pressures may originate in the different
traditions, culture, organisation and levels of task delivery of further-higher
education and their HE partners. Then the problem of institutional duality clouds
this issue, too. This may create divergence rather than convergence of
organisational forms. If so, the question is which model if any dominates or will
diverse hybrid organisational forms emerge as a permanent feature?
More broadly, and to return to the global trends impacting on HE, one common
strategy to achieve the separation of policy from its implementation adopted by the
state is to follow the reinventing government paradigm pioneered in the USA by
Gaebler and Osbourne, (1992).
Thus the role of the central state in legitimating organisational behaviour is not only
prominent in the further-higher organisational field through the regulatory
structures it devises to oversee quality assurance and funding regimes set against 
215
government goals and targets but in its separation of policy from operational
delivery. The quasi-markets or managed markets that characterise further-higher
education do not operate through the price mechanism but through a set of state
sponsored surrogates and targets that oversee the institutional and organisational
contexts in which this takes place. These are mediated by intermediaries or
boundary organisations that straddle the further-higher interface. The role and
function of these boundary organisations are discussed in the next chapter.
Hybrid Organisational Forms: Franchising
Among the various arrangements that exist at the further-higher interface few exist
as forms of provision that are independent of linkages with external bodies.
Boundary setting and boundary spanning are thus important and constitute
functions and processes that are useful for understanding these linkages. This
section concentrates on franchising in further-higher education as an example of a
model adopted from private sector business format franchising. This hybrid
organisational form is briefly investigated here and the significance of franchising
using the above conceptual framework is then explored for its theoretical
significance and analytical utility for understanding further-higher education. A
separate chapter examines it in greater depth and with a more applied focus in part
three of the thesis.
The inter-organisational transaction typical of franchising is explored using
theoretical insights that were designed to understand the business format franchise
typical of the private sector. Following the approach of new institutional economics 
216
a business format franchise model is understood as a mechanism for solving the
problems of coordinating economic activity that is difficult to monitor and that can
potentially generate agency problems. The example of franchising is dealt with in a
more extended discussion in part three where it is illustrated with reference to the
period of ‘low policy’ designated elsewhere in this thesis as the ‘franchise
experiment’.
However, the research problem and the exploratory theoretical case study
methodology followed in this thesis is focussed upon how to conceptualise interorganisational
transactions that cross organisational boundaries and that are
essentially relational, reciprocal and mutually subject to external regulation. The
cultural-cognitive, normative and regulative institutional pressures identified by
neo-institutionalist theory fleshes out to some extent these processes and
exchanges. Franchising offers a theoretical case against which these institutional
forces can be investigated conceptually and these transactions and boundaries
explored.
Private sector business format franchising thus offers a number of insights that
may be useful for understanding further-higher education collaboration. Combining
these with the insights of new institutional economics and other studies of interorganisational
collaboration from organisational theory allows us to develop these
ideas further.
The concept of asset specificity, for example, indicates the reciprocal and relational
dependence of these bilaterally dependent organisations and requires that the 
217
transaction needs to be put in context in terms of its embeddedness in a wider set
of socio-political, economic and cultural exchanges. Whether this is the site
specificity that is a function of geographical proximity or distance, the human asset
specificity that is linked to the pedagogic distinctiveness of further-higher education
delivery compared to traditional HE, or whether it is the dedicated specificity of non
re-deployable resources, a franchise is a mutually interdependent organisational
form. The transaction is not then confined to organisational boundaries but extends
across them.
It is not a symmetrical relationship because the franchisor retains overall control of
some desired resource that the franchisee cannot provide alone. In this case it is a
monopoly over the power to award HE qualifications or validate those provided by
the franchisee. The role of power is central to this conceptual understanding of
franchising as an organisational form. It is a dependent relationship. However,
multiple franchise arrangements to some extent can negate this imbalance as can
the implied threat of being able to switch partners.
The brand (brand name capital) that the franchisor allows the franchisee to deliver
is controlled and quality assured by the former. The income received for delivering
the brand is shared out by both organisations. Franchising is therefore a form of
indirect funding. In contrast to directly funded further-higher education provision the
power is highly centralised in the hands of the parent HE partner. Although that still
remains the case with direct funding it is a less starkly asymmetrical relation
because the FEC delivering further-higher education has greater control over its
funds. 
218
Conceptually and theoretically franchising is a hybrid organisational form that
exists because it is able to raise the motivation of legally separate organisations to
collaborate, diversify risk (or uncertainty) and hence deal with possible problems of
opportunism or moral hazard and thus help deal with potential principal agent
problems through coordinating a mutually dependent (although unequal)
collaborative inter-organisational relationship.
It is superior to the market in aligning the incentives and preferences of agents to
those of principals because of its embedded reciprocal nature. It is more flexible
than hierarchy for similar reasons while it reduces direct monitoring and control
costs to external or other agencies. It may also raise the incentives of FECs to
diversify into other forms of provision beyond their core FE delivery or to realign
the proportion of HE delivered to FE internally.
Effectively and as a hybrid the franchise is best conceptualised as a transaction, at
least within a further-higher education context, that consists of a bundle of
attributes that cross organisational boundaries. Some of these raise transaction
costs and others reduce them. Others are better at accommodating, predicting or
offering solutions to principal agent problems, including opportunism and moral
hazard. These transactions are conceptualised as having a number of dimensions
of asset specificity that are mixed in different permutations and combinations. This
provides a degree of adaptability and flexibility that suggests that there is no one
best way of organising at the further-higher interface. 
219
Together transaction cost economics and principal agent theory would predict that
the franchise transaction is a compromise. This is exactly what the grid group
matrix would indicate. A franchise would be neither purely in the individualist,
market quadrant nor the hierarchical quadrant. It would only appear in the
egalitarian (or sect) quadrant as a transitional organisational form that might be
used to set up a preliminary new institutional or organisational configuration.
Moreover, dependent on where in the grid-group matrix a decision maker was
located, then their perceptions of the transaction costs of a particular course of
action may differ. In further-higher education, managers who have limited
experience of HE but are largely FE focussed would perceive transaction costs
differently from HE staff who have to deliver it. Managers who are familiar with HE
would also perceive transaction costs differently from FE managers.
In reality further-higher education constitutes a mix of rationalities, preferences and
incentives and sets of institutionalised constraints embodied in the contractual
nature of the franchise itself. The franchisee’s autonomy would be largely illusory
as asset specificity both ties and binds it to a more powerful franchisor. The role of
the state in shifting this relation of dependency therefore becomes highly
significant. For example the recent announcement that further-higher education
providers could apply for foundation degree awarding powers will inevitably shift
this imbalance of power in some circumstances.
Managing and coordinating complex inter-organisational relations such as the
franchise at the system level is difficult. To varying extents each of the distinct
organisational forms populating the further-higher organisational field generates a 
220
different set of problems and different set of solutions as a consequence of
operating dual regimes and plural control and authority structures.
The lessons that can be learnt from this cursory analysis of private sector business
franchising for further-higher education inter-organisational collaborations relate to
the managing of the tensions between organisational autonomy and dependency
and the power relations embedded in similar inter-organisational collaborations
where one partner has a near monopoly on the brand name capital of a product or
service. The hybridity of private sector practices are useful solutions for dealing
with incentive problems, spreading risk and uncertainty and accessing new
markets. However, there are also limitations as to what can be learned. Furtherhigher
education provision is something that in itself is developing and moving
beyond the franchise stage of its development.
Conceptualising the Further-Higher Interface.
This section addresses the issue of what lessons can be learned from this attempt
to theorise and conceptualise the dynamics of the further-higher interface and how
transactions and exchanges that are configured in further-higher education can be
contextualised?
The grid group matrix, used in the previous chapter as a heuristic device to capture
the social and cultural construction of organisational preferences and the incentive
structures or ‘cultural biases’ of organisational decision making, is useful for linking
context to process and for highlighting the relationship between the structural 
221
attributes of transactions and exchanges and the governance structures or
institutional arrangements that oversee them.
Organisational preferences and incentives do not exist in a vacuum and are
steered at a system level through direct and indirect levers that dispense funds,
oversee the requirements for quality of provision and planning in further-higher
education. The institutional duality of further-higher education complicates this.
The first lesson is that the transactions are embedded in concrete social relations
that are channelled through institutional arrangements configured in organisational
fields and that they must be understood as part of a wider political economy.
The second lesson is that conceptualising the further-higher interface requires the
development of an analytical model that goes beyond mere description in order to
understand the complexities and dynamics of institutional and organisational
change in further-higher education and the emergence of new organisational forms
in its organisational field.
The final lesson is to recognise that the use of new institutional economics
approaches such as transaction cost economics needs to be contextualised in
terms of the cultural-cognitive, normative, regulative and coercive institutional
pressures in order to move beyond a one dimensional economic analysis to
incorporate a sociologically aware analytical framework for understanding the
further-higher education interface. That is the economic co-ordination of further-
222
higher education is embedded in wider social, economic, cultural and political
processes.
By adopting this conceptual approach it allows the exploration of the theoretical
attributes of concrete further-higher education transactions in context.
Consequently the transaction, as the core unit of analysis in this case study, is
understood as a bilaterally dependent inter-organisational relationship embedded
in specific social relations, organisations, organisational fields and institutional
environments that configure the settings and context in which organisational actors
position themselves at the further-higher interface.
There are a number of implications in adopting this theoretical framework. Firstly
rational economic behaviour, as is assumed to exist in the neo-classical paradigm
and in the relaxed variant of neo-classical economics that is associated with new
institutional economics cannot be assumed a-priori. A mechanism needs to be
identified whereby preferences and organisational incentive structures, whether
‘rational’ or ‘non rational,’ are socially constructed and filtered through specific
institutional environments and institutional arrangements that configure an
organisational field.
Moreover, the impact of institutional pressures and organisational structures which
operate across organisational boundaries and influence the social construction of
these preferences and organisational decisions need to be explored further. For
further-higher education providers and their HE partners these are an empirical
question. What has hitherto been lacking is a theoretical framework to pose the 
223
question of how the construction of organisational preferences and incentives in
further-higher education can be linked to a wider understanding of the role and
function of further-higher education in widening participation and access to HE.
This chapter has constructed an analytical framework for understanding how
transactions and exchanges are configured at the further-higher interface. The
socio-political, economic, historical, cultural-cognitive and ideological contexts in
which further-higher education transactions are embedded have then been
contextualised. Through a combination of analysing the structural aspects of the
transactions and exchanges at the further-higher interface with the institutional
arrangements that oversee them the mix of process to context can be considered
iteratively and in historical context.
The socio-political, economic, historical, cultural-cognitive and ideological contexts
in which these further-higher education transactions are embedded have been
contextualised through combining a neo-institutionalist version of sociological
institutionalism and political economy with new institutional economics and a
transaction cost approach to understanding transactions and exchanges at the
further-higher interface.
Hybrid organisational forms in further-higher education were then conceptualised
as permutations of asset specificity in order to move away from a dualistic
interpretation and to produce a relational, contextual and holistic understanding of
boundary work in further-higher education. In particular, the issue of the costs of
transacting using one organisational form rather than another or of using one 
224
governance structure than another was addressed. In a similar vein the drawing of
boundaries in inter-organisational bilaterally dependent relations premised on
medium to high levels of asset specificity was considered.
The next chapter considers the nature of boundaries and boundary work in furtherhigher
education and the role and function of hybrid organisational forms in
internalising the institutional duality of the further-higher interface. 
225
CHAPTER EIGHT
BOUNDARY WORK IN FURTHER-HIGHER EDUCATION
This chapter investigates the boundary work that takes place at the further-higher
interface. It considers the role and function of boundary institutions, boundary
organisations and boundary objects in mediating exchanges there. Boundary work
is contextualised as part of a process of hybridisation at the interface. How
boundaries are categorised and classified, and the exchanges that take place
across the interface are analysed, is a constant process of organising and
disorganising that is fluid and interactive. Boundaries are neither stable nor
objective constructs that can be understood as simple dualities or in isolation. They
are permeable and meaningful only within a model that is holistic and relational
providing a contextual framework for their analysis. Here the focus is on how
boundary work and hybridisation in further-higher education can be
conceptualised. Hybridisation and the blurring of boundaries at the further-higher
interface are investigated as adaptive responses to the institutional contradictions,
conflicts and tensions that are generated as a consequence of the institutional
duality of further-higher education
How the further-higher interface is institutionalised, configured and classified and
how boundary work maintains and mediates sector and inter-organisational
boundaries is the main focus of this chapter. A number of conceptual distinctions 
226
that are made in the process of analysing this boundary work to facilitate are
clarified.
First the concept of hybridisation is unpicked. Secondly distinctions are made
between boundary work, boundary organisations and boundary objects.Thirdly
boundary work is considered and contextualised in terms of the role and function of
boundary organisations as mediators of the separate funding, quality and planning
functions that have characterised the FE and HE sectors over a twenty year time
frame.
In order to investigate the boundary work taking place at the further-higher
interface and within its organisational field an assessment of the relation of process
to context and the role and function of intermediaries and mechanisms whereby
boundary work is conducted is undertaken. These processes, contexts and
dynamics are accessed through a theoretical case study that does not distinguish
between phenomenon and context but analyses their iteration in detail holistically
and relationally.
Boundary Work
In an early development of the concept of boundary work Gieryn (1983, p.782), in
the context of work done in the social studies of science and technology, defines
boundary-work as:
‘... the attribution of certain characteristics to the institution of science
(for example: to its practitioners, methods, store of knowledge, values 
227
and organisation of labour) for the purpose of constructing a social
boundary that differentiates some intellectual activities as being “nonscience”.

Gieryn’s (1983) initial conceptualisation of boundary work can also be applied to
the demarcation of the boundaries between and within organisational fields. The
role and function of boundary organisations and boundary objects that are
commonly found in structured partnerships of inter-organisational collaboration in
further-higher education is analogous to that of those he investigated at the policyscience
nexus. If one replaces science with HE and non science with FE, using
Gieryn’s model, then organising at the further-higher interface effectively links two
distinct institutional logics and organisational modes of operation. Both of the latter
originate in the separate sector identities and legacies of FE and HE sectors.
Separate cultures, structures, practices and values originally informed these sector
legacies and the impact of these legacies on contemporary configurations at the
further-higher interface remains influential.
This boundary work and cross sector collaboration also take place at the same
time as boundaries are being maintained or re-enforced. FE and HE partners
remain autonomous and legally distinct entities. These processes are not best
captured through dichotomies but represent polarities of interaction at the furtherhigher
interface. They need to be understood relationally and holistically.
Such processes become more important in those situations when independent and
autonomous organisations operate collaboratively to pursue a common goal as in
this case of widening participation and access to HE. The institutional duality of 
228
further-higher education compounds these processes through the operation of
plural authority and control structures. These are the ‘wicked problems’ of furtherhigher
education referred to earlier in the thesis which are rooted in the potential
tension and conflicts created when multiple principal-agent relations, ambiguous
goals and competing values play out in a diverse and fragmented organisational
field.
To the extent that boundary work creates divisions between FE and HE and
boundary maintenance mechanisms apply, there may be tensions that impede the
crossing of boundaries. These may often be subtle, tacit and informal and rooted in
the different past practices, conventions, institutional logics and cultural traditions
that originate in the separate sector histories of FE and HE. Equally permeable
boundaries may enhance inter-sector and inter-organisational collaboration.
Thus boundary work is also simultaneously a process of demarcation and
deconstruction of existing boundaries through the reproduction and reconstitution
of old boundaries and the reconfiguration or institutionalisation of new ones at the
further-higher interface. This is a constant, cyclical and dynamic process through
which the interface is constantly being reproduced and reconfigured. For this
reason static dualities are of limited use in understanding boundary distinctions
and reify existing boundary work.
The boundaries between FE and HE have blurred with a number of significant
shifts in their categorisation and classification especially after incorporation and
then following the Dearing Report of 1997. In terms of the grid-group heuristic 
229
there has been a blurring of group, for example of the public and private divide and
of distinctions between FE and HE, and a strengthening of grid in terms of an
increased emphasis on audit and inspection by external agencies.
These shifts ushered in changes in institutionalised classification that demarcated
the roles, rules and systems of classification of further-higher education. The push
towards more structured forms of collaborative provision was one of the most
significant of these placing an emphasis on intermediary organisations and
institutional frameworks that spanned FE and HE. These transitions need to be
analysed at a systems level and as an integrated system of classification reflecting
the economic and social organisation of further-higher education. In the following
section the organisational field is conceptualised as the context in which boundary
work and boundary organisations operate at a meso level. It is the organisational
field which mediates the macro institutional environment and the micro decision
making processes and positioning strategies of further-higher education providers
and their boundary work.
Boundary Institutions
A boundary institution is a macro level concept that generically configures the
institutional framework in which institutional arrangements operate across sector
boundaries and organisational fields. The ‘rules of the game’ that oversee the
institutionalisation of specific cross sector institutional arrangements and the
structuration of the further-higher organisational field are constituted through 
230
legislation and formal and informal conventions and routines that cross sector and
field divides.
Boundary institutions are rooted in the legislative and political processes that
determine policy and direct and configure institutional arrangements and boundary
organisations in an organisational field. They mediate different domains of activity
within the social structure of a national economy while maintaining a degree of
closure from other fields.
Specific institutional arrangements that facilitate structured coordination across
sector boundaries are configured through the boundary institutions situated in the
institutional environment. Boundary institutions thus configure interfaces and
delimit field boundaries.
Boundary Organisations
A boundary organisation is usually an agency or consists of more or less
permanent group of communities of interest that straddles an interface, in this case
the further-higher interface, whose role and function is to mediate bridge or buffer
the interface and facilitate communication across sector and inter-organisational
boundaries. They function to translate, communicate and mediate inter-sector
divides that are often grounded in different organisational assumptions or
differences in fundamental premises about what further-higher education is.
Boundary organisations operate in the context of institutional duality in furtherhigher
education bridging sector and inter-organisational divides. 
231
Boundary organisations mediate inter-organisational collaboration through the
interpretation, translation and implementation of the ‘rules of the game’ that link
and regulate further-higher education in the organisational field and the
implementation of the institutional arrangements through which they are delivered.
As occupiers of synapses or nodes in an organisational field boundary
organisations also intermediate cross sector working at the further-higher
education interface. Boundary work refers to the servicing of inter-boundary and
inter-sector divides that are found at the intersection of two institutional logics,
social worlds and sectors.
These organisations may be weakly or strongly embedded or institutionalised in
the institutional landscape of further-higher education either functioning at the
margins of a field if weakly embedded in practice or at the centre if strongly
embedded. Funding and quality agencies tend to be strongly embedded in practice
and influence not least because of their ability to apply mechanism of coercive
isomorphism. The implications for non compliance with these regulatory boundary
organisations can be severe.
Therefore boundary organisations mediate the discontinuities in practice between
existing prevailing institutional logics, different domains of practice and ways of
organising and ‘cultural biases’ that are found in the different traditions and
historical legacies in FE and HE. They act as bridges to provide a common
vocabulary and a common set of meanings that can cross inter-organisational
boundaries. 
232
Boundary organisations are thus embedded in organisational fields that are the
consequence of a successful process of institutionalisation through which preferred
forms of organising become embedded and embodied in a further-higher education
organisations practice. Within fields, boundary organisations and boundary objects
mediate the discontinuities in practice between the incumbents of the field.
Boundaries demarcate liminal zones, the sites of a constant process of organising
and reconfiguration in never ending incremental cycles of change and stabilisation.
The idea of liminality implies an in between state of affairs in the transition from
one structural state to another. Unlike dualism or dichotomies which tend towards
the static the liminal nature of boundaries as a state of becoming and organising
focuses analysis on these processual mechanisms. The liminal represents an
intermediate stage and an ambiguous ‘middle’ and transitional point between two
social structurally stable states. Such boundary work is the stuff of everyday
practice in further-higher education, a volatile and constant process of
configuration and reconfiguration at the further-higher interface. It is this structural
liminality that makes further-higher education anomalous even in the context of a
shift to a mass system of HE (Scott, 2009).
Structured further-higher education partnerships will be at different stages of
development and maturation at any one point in time. What will often be common
to a successful collaboration is that boundary organisations facilitate links across
organisational boundaries. These disjunctures of practice are set in contexts and
practices that cannot be understood in isolation. Boundary organisations help 
233
integrate pluralism, different institutional logics and other differences, across sector
and organisational divides. They also produce boundary objects as the medium
through which inter-organisational and inter sector collaboration takes place.
Boundary Objects
The idea of a boundary object as a mediator of practice is derived from a term
originally coined by Star and Griesemer (1989). A boundary object occupies an
interstitial zone of translation between divergent interests groups that meet in some
form of inter organisational collaborative enterprise through which they share, at
least in part, a common purpose and common understandings. Boundary objects
are:
“objects which both inhabit several intersecting social worlds and
satisfy the informational requirements of each of them. Boundary
objects are objects which are plastic enough to adapt to local needs
and the constraints of the several parties employing them, yet
robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites. They
are weakly structured in common use, and become strongly
structured in individual use. These objects may be abstract or
concrete. They have different meanings in different social worlds
but their structure is common enough to more than one world to
make them recognizable, a means of translation. The creation and
management of boundary objects is a key process in developing
and maintaining coherence across intersecting social worlds.” (Star
and Griesemer,1989, p 393).
Boundary objects link ‘communities of practice’ (Lave and Wenger, 1991) or
provide mechanisms of intermediation that broker the construction of shared 
234
meanings across the FE and HE divide and the boundaries between autonomous
and independent organisations each of which has its own distinct separate identity.
As its name implies a boundary object can be an object or an artefact; but it can
equally be a process, a role, an event, an encounter or even a document.
Boundary objects connect practices across different organisations which are
simultaneously engaged in a structured collaboration mediating organisational
boundaries. In further-higher education they link two once separate sectors
following different institutional logics and act as points of translation, boundary
permeability and boundary crossing. They mediate the emergence of shared
meanings among partners at the FE and HE interface who may be initially
unfamiliar with each others working practices and may lack a common vocabulary
for understanding these practices and the modus operandi of partners. At the
further-higher interface they occupy a liminal space betwixt and between the FE
and HE sectors.
While the concept of boundary implies separation, distinction, exclusion and
inclusion, the idea of a boundary object helps facilitate communication and
exchange between organisations. It alerts analysis to the common frameworks of
meaning that, although nevertheless partial and often marginal to the core
activities of organisations in FE and HE, are necessarily shared.
In further-higher education there is rarely a balance of power between FE and HE
because for many further-higher education providers HE is a marginal activity and
access to power and resources is asymmetrical. In situations where a more 
235
significant volume of further-higher education is delivered pressures to conform to
a uniform set of processes and procedures that originate in another sector can
create problems. Even in the MEG where HE is a significant proportion of furtherhigher
providers activity there are asymmetrical relations between organisations in
terms of resources and their ability to define which ‘rules of the game’, either FE or
HE, will apply.
However, boundary objects act also as mechanism for transacting, coordinating
and aligning organisational preferences, dispositions and interests between the
two distinct world views operating on the distinct institutional logics of different
collaborating groups and organisations. Boundary objects are multi functional
serving multiple constituencies. They consist of complex principal-agent relations,
dual authority and control structures and sometimes contested rationalities. They
can also help manage local uncertainties and risk in partnerships and guard
against opportunism to help solidify the legitimacy and trust involved for the
effective operation of inter-organisational collaboration.
Thus the role and function of boundary objects is to mediate collaborative
processes through providing a mechanism for aligning a common and flexible
framework for connecting organisational practices between these bilaterally
dependent collaborating organisations. These allow actors from the different
organisations to orient themselves to a common framework or set of ‘rules of the
game’. At the same time collaborating groups or organisations retain their own
distinct identities. Thus boundary objects are a means whereby relations between
diverse groups are mediated and negotiated through shared use. 
236
Boundary objects can also constitute elements of the organisational memory in
cases in which collaborations have been long standing and trust and reputation
has become embedded in practice and as a medium for aligning them.
There are clear differences in working practices, cultures and traditions in FE and
HE. This structural differentiation may potentially cause tensions at the furtherhigher
interface. Boundary organisations and boundary spanners function to
translate and communicate across these disjunctures of practice and sector and
organisational divides. The institutional duality of further-higher education is a
consequence of a dynamic that originates in its institutional environment and is
mediated via the institutional arrangements overseeing further-higher provision
becoming internalised in its operating practices. The internalisation of the external
duality of further-higher education has led to a complex and diverse range of
organisational forms and structures.
The consequence is that the dispositions, preferences and incentive structures of
different groups in further-higher education and the construction of common
ground and meaning systems are often contested. Indeed this is the essence of
the ‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education. Managing these tensions,
paradoxes and anomalies at the further-higher interface and embedding their
resolution in stable forms of organising in a highly fluid and uncertain environment
is the goal of successful collaboration. Legitimising inter-sector and interorganisational
boundary work is equally important given the different premises
from which HE sector boundary organisations and further-higher providers start 
237
from. These are rooted in the different sector legacies and identities that predate
the incorporation of FECs and HE providers.
Connecting Boundaries
Taken together the concepts of boundary objects, boundary organisations and
boundary institutions allow the exploration of boundary work at the further-higher
interface and the processes that mediate further-higher provision. The dynamic
nature of boundary work as a constant process of organising and disorganising,
configuration and re-configuration of the interface and boundaries of further-higher
education and the institutionalisation of boundary work in further-higher education
under conditions of institutional duality suggests that the further-higher interface
can not be understood as a simple duality.
Understanding the dynamics, tensions and processes of organising at the furtherhigher
interface in the contexts and situations or circumstances in which they are
embedded is essential for understanding what contributes to successful furtherhigher
education partnerships and the widening participation and access agenda.
In moving away from static concepts of dualistic and dichotomised analysis in
which FE is contrasted to HE, a holistic, relational, situational and historical
approach to identifying the hybridisation of further-higher education provision
across sectors can be established. The positioning strategies of organisations
within the further-higher organisational field can then be contextualised against this
setting. Moreover the relation of further-higher education as non university
provision and HE as university provision must be understood relationally in order to 
238
unpack the roles and functions of further-higher education for HE and visa versa in
widening participation.
The conceptualisation of further-higher education as an instituted process in which
the economic is embedded in social, cultural and political relations that reflect a
wider political economy is central to the argument of this thesis. For this reason
conceptualising the process of hybridisation taking place at the further-higher
interface, which is an ongoing and constantly evolving process, can only be
understood contextually.
The grid-group heuristic has been used to conceptualise and to capture these
linkages as relational constructs that consist of alternative and contested modes of
organising in further-higher education. Hence individualism is contrasted to
hierarchy, egalitarianism to fatalism and fatalism as a passive quadrant to the other
three active quadrants of individualism, hierarchy and egalitarian enclaves. In
reality they will all coexist at any one time and each has its weaknesses and
strengths. The process of hybridisation constantly configures and reconfigures
mixes and combinations of these ‘ways of life’ and distinct institutional logics in
new organisational forms that cross sector and institutional boundaries.
‘Clumsy Institutions’ and Hybridisation
The term ‘clumsy institution’ at first seems to be a counter intuitive description of
what is in effect a flexible and adaptive organisational form. It was initially used to 
239
describe hybrid organisational forms that could accommodate the contested
modes of organising identified in the grid-group heuristic.
Further-higher education as a ‘wicked problem’ is too diverse and complex to have
one simple solution to the problem of widening participation to HE while aligning
equity and social justice with marketisation and the increasing disparities in
resources, status and reputation within the organisational field of which it is a
subordinate component advocacy group. Moreover, given the local access
orientation of further-higher education and the specifics of links with local labour
markets and regional variations between types of provision, there is unlikely to be
one solution for delivering further-higher education.
Thompson (1993) and Verweij et al (2006) have used the term ’clumsy institutions’
to conceptualise the contested nature of different modes of organising, identified
through the grid-group matrix. The constant contestation of modes of organising
based on individualism, on hierarchical coordination, through egalitarianism or
networks and fatalism have been conceptualised as constants in any form of
economic or social coordination and system of classification. They all coexist to
some extent although in different mixes with usually one dominant.
Indeed, that is the point. Unless there is a balance of different modes of organising
and ‘ways of life’ that reflect the different experiences, expectations, preferences
and incentives of individuals, groups and organisations then ‘solutions’ to ‘wicked
problems’ will tend to be ineffective. For this reason ‘clumsy institutions’ are
needed. 
240
‘Clumsy institutions’ produce clumsy solutions that do not involve choosing one
solution and rejecting all the rest but incorporate plural rationalities and multiple
voices. At the further-higher education interface these plural rationalities represent
different voices, experiences, traditions and conventions rooted in the past history
of what were once separate sectors.
The anomalies, tensions and paradoxes that are found at the fault lines of the
further-higher organisational field are the consequence of institutional duality and it
is these that are internalised in the working practices of the hybrid organisations
that are found at the further-higher interface.
An anomaly or tension at the further-higher interface is not necessarily a bad thing
as long as its contestability is recognised and debated and its source understood.
However, it needs to be managed and recognised for what it is. Boundary work in
further-higher education is frequently faced with paradoxes and tensions that
emerge as a consequence of the institutional duality of further-higher education.
‘Clumsy institutions’ provide the flexibility and adaptability to combine various
components and permutations of assets specificity that tie inter-organisational
collaboration in a bilaterally dependent situation of co-dependence within the
context of an organisational field
The move away from dualistic analysis is significant as it allow the mixes of asset
specificity originating in transaction cost economics to be incorporated in a neoinstitutionalist
framework derived from Douglas’ grid-group heuristic. Clumsiness 
241
facilitates the diversification of options and the use of plural rationalities and
frameworks of problem definition in order to deal with institutional duality and
results in a hybridisation of further-higher education. Plurality and flexibility are the
order of the day while transactions and exchanges at the further-higher interface
are contextualised in their appropriate cultural mode or way of life and the mixes
and permutations that result.
Clumsy institutions are multi dimensional institutions. They accommodate all of the
four modes of organising identified in the grid-group heuristic. ‘Wicked problem’
may require ‘clumsy solutions’ because there is no one model fits all solution.
‘Wicked Problems and ‘Clumsy Institutions’
The ‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education is not only how to align equity
issues with the drive to marketisation and massification but also revolves around
how to manage the tensions between organisational dependence and autonomy at
the boundaries of bilaterally dependent inter-organisational collaboration and under
conditions of institutional duality. The medium to high levels of asset specificity
found in further-higher provision that connects providers in bilaterally dependent
inter-organisational collaboration define the inevitability of hybrid solutions because
no one organisation is likely to be able to impose its own practices on another
without some degree of modification. The independence or autonomy of participant
organisations in collaborative settings is always a potential site of tension. The
bilateral dependence of further-higher education and the structural asset specificity 
242
of its collaborative arrangements have already been outlined and contextualised
via the grid-group heuristic in preceding chapters.
There the grid-group heuristic helped conceptualise the essential contested nature
of different modes of organising in further-higher education based upon different
organisational preferences and frameworks of meaning that correlate to the four
quadrants of the grid-group matrix. It has set the scene for understanding the
configuration of the boundary infrastructure of the further-higher organisational field
and tracks the fault lines along which resources are contested and boundaries
negotiated and spanned.
Further-higher education is also a ‘wicked problem’ which often exists in conditions
of system complexity, diversity, ambiguity and institutional, environmental
turbulence and uncertainty when multiple organisational interests and different
value systems co-exist in any one particular setting. Indeed it is unlikely that one
solution exists for ‘wicked problems’ and that a plurality of solutions and diversity of
responses is more likely to be effective.
The consequence can be a set of systemic tensions that have to be managed but
may not have a solution. The role and function of boundary work and the
mechanisms and agencies of boundary management is vital for understanding the
complexity of the tensions that result as a consequence of the institutional duality
of further-higher education. 
243
Boundary Properties
The strength of a group boundary and the rules and roles that classify and channel
the behaviour of its members has been captured through the grid-group heuristic in
chapter Six. Boundary work, however, is a process and has to be understood
relationally, contextually and holistically as well as in terms of how the boundary
infrastructure is configured and demarcated. This section focuses on the minutiae
of boundary work as a process against the context through which it is played out
and as a constant cyclical process of organising and disorganising at the furtherhigher
interface. It analyses the shifting roles and functions of boundary
organisations and boundary objects in mediating inter-organisational boundary
work and in configuring the further-higher interface.
Boundary Crossing
Carlile (2002) offers a useful analysis for analysing the properties of boundaries
and the role of boundary objects and boundary crossing practices in interorganisational
collaboration that can aid an understanding of boundary work in
further-higher education. He refers to the differences between collaborating
organisations; the degree of dependency between partners, and a feature he
terms novelty as an outcome of inter-organisational links.
The extent of difference between collaborating organisations and the similarities
and differences of cultures, traditions, processes and practices between them is a
key factor in establishing the potential permeability of boundaries and the success 
244
of boundary crossing practices. This is because the more different two
collaborating organisations are then the greater the transaction costs in creating
common understanding and frameworks of meaning will be. In further-higher
education the degree of organisational proximity of organisational practices and
cultures will make it easier for collaboration to occur through the shared
frameworks of meaning possessed by each engaged at the further-higher interface
and across inter-organisational boundaries which in turn can reduce transaction
costs.
The extent to which the collaborating groups are dependent on each other is one
factor. High levels of interdependence that mean shared assets cannot easily be
deployed elsewhere increase dependency as does the lack of alternative partners
to collaborate with: in other words there are medium to high levels of asset
specificity operating.
In further-higher education the core analytical distinction is that further-higher
provision is based on the bilateral dependency and medium to high levels of asset
specificity and that the collaborating organisations are both interdependent and
autonomous. This is not conceptualised as a duality but as a constant tension
between autonomy and dependence embedded in processes of organising at the
further-higher interface and across organisational boundaries. This is a process
that can only be understood against the context in which it takes place.
The third factor is the extent to which collaboration incorporates novelty into interorganisational
partnerships as a means of generating synergies and new ways of 
245
working and for dealing with uncertainty and risk in further-higher education. Here
the concept of bricolage is useful. Bricolage in further-higher education refers to
making do with whatever already exists and is at hand, either material, symbolic or
social resources, and mediates existing tensions embedded in the institutional
environment and institutional arrangements of further-higher education. Bricolage
results in the reconfiguration or recombination of existing elements in new
permutations, mixes or hybrid organisational forms.
The phase of ‘low policy’ in the development of further-higher education was
typically characterised by this process of bricolage and an associated lack of
strategic planning. Policy makers had limited knowledge of the scale and scope of
further-higher provision as the evidence base was thin and responses to changing
situations in further-higher education tended to be ad hoc and reactive.
Carlile (2002) also refers to boundary properties in terms of what he refers to as
the syntactic, aspect of boundary work, or sharing of a common language or
system of classification; the semantic or the cognitive dimension whereby the
social construction of collective meaning between collaborating organisation takes
place; and the pragmatic or the realm of strategy and positioning of organisations
within an organisational field. Applying these insights to further-higher education
there is potential that these analytical constructs can facilitate an in depth
understanding of the processes of boundary work at the further-higher interface as
an iteration of context and process. 
246
Further-higher education collaborating organisations are still in the stage of
developing a common language, syntax and semantics but sector legacies
continue to be influential at an informal level and are deeply rooted in the internal
stratification of systems of classification and stratification of further-higher
education. The syntactic dimension of boundary properties is thus in flux but the
trend is towards a degree of shared understanding which began in a significant
way when the HEFCE and QAA took on responsibility for the oversight of furtherhigher
education post Dearing.
The semantic dimension goes to the heart of the contested nature of further-higher
education and its meaning and the struggle over the claims to legitimacy that these
entail. It is here that HE providers and further-higher providers most often argue
from different premises and axioms as to what further-higher education is or should
be. As Parry (2008) argues further-higher education has not yet been accepted as
a legitimate part of traditional HE and there is disagreement as to what it should
legitimately become.
The pragmatic dimension refers to the political aspect of boundary work in furtherhigher
education and the positioning of providers within the further-higher
organisational field. Dual systems of control and authority exist at the further-higher
interface. Providers may switch between these as is considered prudent. Binary
and dual types of organisational structures may be adopted that either integrate or
separate an further-higher provision. These are political decisions and part of the
pragmatics of further-higher education. Hybrid organisational forms also exist 
247
within further-higher education that are neither FE nor are they HE but a
combination of both.
Boundary objects and boundary organisations occupy the interstitial liminal spaces
at which these influences are played out, facilitating synergy between collaborating
organisations within a field through the construction of common frames of
meaning, while at the same time organisations in the field maintain their distinct
identities and spheres of autonomy in the midst of increasing diversity.
There are inevitably explicit and implicit tensions and ambiguities as a
consequence of this institutional duality while boundary objects and boundary
organisations mediate contradictions that reflect these tensions and ambiguities in
further-higher education. In this betwixt and between world of transitions and
translations boundary objects are a locus of coordination and institutionalisation
and a site of constant and recycled inter-organisational practice.
Within an analytical framework that consists of the four generic modes of
organising identified through the grid-group heuristic these modes of organising
within further-higher education are constantly reconfiguring themselves in varying
mixes, proportions and permutations of asset specificity. Cycles of increasing
hierarchy are therefore ameliorated through increasing marketisation; increasing
competition with cooperation (or co-opetition); collegiality with managerialism; and
claims of increasing professional accountability with the debilitation of trust and the
growth of the ‘audit society’ (Power, 1997). These complex dynamics are part of
the ‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education. 
248
Throughout these cyclical shifts and phases the blurring further-higher interface
and organisational boundaries mark a disjuncture of practice re-enforced by
symbolic, cognitive, cultural as well as legal dimensions. These boundaries and
interfaces are not static but are fluid and in a constant process of change and at
the intersection of the four generic modes of organising: individualism, hierarchy,
egalitarian or enclave modes of organising and fatalism. How boundary work
becomes institutionalised as practice in this process of constant organising and
disorganising has been the subject of this chapter.
The boundary objects that are likely to be effective in crossing sector and interorganisational
divides will vary. A hierarchical boundary object is not always likely
to be effective in an egalitarian context although it could be. Similarly an egalitarian
boundary object in the form of consultation will only be effective to the point that is
perceived as possessing legitimacy. Otherwise boundary objects can become
exercises in performativity or of mock bureaucracy (Gouldner, 1954).
While boundaries in further-higher education are drawn at the margins or
disjuncture of practice they are largely delimited by the central state which is the
dominant player overseeing and steering the institutional environment of furtherhigher
education through boundary institutions. This generates an overall climate
of institutional duality in further-higher education. The tension between
organisational autonomy and centralised state control is further mediated by
intermediary boundary organisations such the HEFCE and QAA. Such boundary
organisations mark a broad shift in the grid and group dimension that reflect a 
249
broader trend from government to governance, and towards steering not rowing,
associated with NPM reforms in the public sector (see chapter Nine).
Transaction cost economics would claim that boundaries in inter-organisational
collaboration and the most efficient institutional environment and institutional
arrangements that oversee them will be drawn at the point at which transaction
costs are reduced to such an extent that they are less costly and more efficient
than alternative ways of organising. However, this efficiency argument tends to
ignore power, the political dimensions of transaction costs and the subjective
dimension of perceiving and accurately assessing costs. It also ignores the
contested nature of further-higher education and the plural rationalities that operate
within further-higher education and persistent sector legacies and identities (Smith,
2008).
One key function of a hybrid organisation is that it crosses organisational
boundaries and that organisational learning is a joint process in which synergies
are generated through collaboration and potential innovation through the
emergence of new organisational forms. It is therefore unlikely that innovative
practices could be costed in the way that transaction costs theory presumes.
Hybrids are ‘clumsy institutions’ in this sense.
Consequently, and especially given the pace of institutional and organisational
change in further-higher education over the last twenty years, prior knowledge of
the relative efficiency of alternative governance structures based on hybrid
structures of control, coordination and authority, cannot plausibly be assumed in 
250
advance. Indeed, the reforms witnessed seemed very much an experiment and a
discovery process and in an even stronger sense unplanned and chaotic:
especially during the phase of ‘low policy’ and bricolage (see chapter Ten).
In that context hybrid organisations are instances of proto-institutionalisation that
may or may not lead to stable organisational forms in the future and the question
that remains is whether they will become fully institutionalised as practice. Hybrids
operate in multifunctional domains and prior knowledge of each domain cannot be
assumed on the part of organisational agents. Consequently the efficiency
argument of transaction cost economics has its limitations.
Even more importantly the sudden shift from an institutional configuration and set
of ‘rules of the game’ determined through boundary institutions that emphasised
competition and marketisation as the means to widening participation to one that
stressed structured collaboration could not take place overnight. The shift from a
competitive culture to a collaborative culture or ethos would take time to become
embedded as practice.
What was possibly an advantage of the hybrid organisational forms and
governance structures post Dearing, however, was the ability of hybrids to act as a
buffer and to reduce opportunistic behaviour in the longer term which may have
been encouraged in the market driven culture of ‘low policy’ when rapid expansion
of HE was encouraged followed by rapid capping of numbers. 
251
This is because as a hybrid the defining characteristic of further-higher education
inter-organisational collaboration is its bilateral dependence between organisations
and the sharing of assets and resources while retaining a separate legal identity
and degree of autonomy from each other. This can only be understood in a
relational framework that stresses context against process. Hybridisation is both a
process of learning and a discovery process at times of rapid change and in
conditions of institutional duality and a means of coping with paradox and anomaly.
Boundary Work and Organisational Fields
This section considers the boundary work that takes place at the margins of the
further-higher organisational field, and especially between further-higher provision
that is conceptualised as a sub-ordinate sub component of a super-ordinate HE
organisational field. These cannot be understood separately and are functionally
integrated within one system and one field dynamic although there are many
tensions and ambiguities where further-higher education and HE meet for the
common purpose of widening participation and access to HE.
The demarcation of an organisational field is an iterative and a dialectical process
mediated collectively and in aggregate through the medium of boundary objects
and boundary organisations and through the boundary work that contributes to its
structuration. Overall the maturation of an organisational field is predicted to go
through a number of phases or iterations as identified by DiMaggio and Powell
(1983). 
252
Firstly, there is the construction of a common meaning system and the formation of
coalitions and alliances characterise a maturing field. These processes are
enabled through boundary objects and boundary organisations within and at the
margins of a field. Secondly, there is increasing frequency of interaction between
incumbents of an emergent organisational field and an increase in the information
load circulating in the field.
In further-higher education boundary objects and boundary organisations act as
conduits to align the interest of collaborating further-higher partners and to mediate
the countervailing pressures of isomorphism in tension with the divergence of
organisational forms within further-higher education. Boundary objects and
organisations occupy liminal and interstitial spaces, the transitional points in social
structural ‘space’ at which practice either will become institutionalised and
embedded as legitimate practice, routine or convention, or it will fail to take root.
Internally and in relation to HE, further-higher education has the characteristic of a
positional good (Marginson, 1997, 2006) and organisations within it position
themselves and orientate their strategic behaviours towards that of other members
of the field through status and reputational orders. The stratification of HE and
further-higher education role and function in the process is part of the ‘wicked
problem’ of aligning equity issues with marketisation.
The massification and marketisation of HE of which further-higher education is an
integral and increasingly important part is leading to a divergence of organisational 
253
forms as well as a convergence generating ‘wicked problems’ in coordinating and
steering an increasingly complex further-higher education system.
Dual or parallel funding, planning and quality systems in further-higher education,
institutional duality and hybrid organisational forms coexist in a mix of
countervailing pressures, tensions, contradictions and synergies at the furtherhigher
education interface. Historically the categorisation and classification of the
interface has also shifted as further-higher education has been reconfigured and
redefined in relation to wider HE.
Utilising the concepts of boundary work and boundary objects and contextualising
them through the use of the grid-group heuristic has facilitated the analysis of this
constant process of formal and informal organising in the further-higher
organisational field and the shifting relation of further-higher education to HE within
one organisational field.
At the boundaries of further-higher education there is a dynamic and turbulent
process at work. Rather than conceptualising this in terms of a stable and reified
boundary that is defined dualistically or as a dichotomy and objectified as a set of
formal classifications and categories, the anomalies, paradoxes and contradictions
that take place when ‘matter is out of place’ as in Douglas’ analysis of anomaly in
classification systems, needs to be taken into account. Asymmetries of power,
status and reputation, not to mention the historical longevity of traditional HE when
compared to further-higher education, mean that the boundary work that takes 
254
place at the further-higher interface inevitably reproduces existing structures of
inequality.
Contextualisation and de-contextualisation of the boundaries of the further-higher
interface are constant features of the construction of an organisational field. The
constant iterative processes of organising, configuration and reconfiguration at the
boundaries of further-higher education do not make sense except as a relation
understood in a context. That is why dichotomies are of limited use in analysing the
boundary work taking place within and at the margins of an organisational field.
Boundaries are not stable but are constantly shifting, forming and reforming; and
the further-higher interface is constantly being reconfigured and reclassified. That
is not to say that there is an infinite numbers of ways of organising as the
processes of institutionalisation result in the sedimentation of practice as
embedded organisational forms and their institutionalisation. As the grid-group
heuristic implies there are four generic modes of organising that are constantly
being recycled in various combinations and mixes. Dualisms and dichotomies are
unable to capture the relational dimensions and contexts that frame these
processes.
These tensions will always exist in an organisational field and different preferences
for different patterns of organising further-higher education will coexist and will
characterise the very duality and hybridity of further-higher education. The grid
group heuristic has been used to explore that duality and the processes of
hybridisation found in further-higher education, the genesis of tensions at its 
255
boundaries and the role of boundary work, boundary objects and boundary
organisations in managing them.
This mapping of the contours of the institutional and organisational landscape of
further-higher education outlines the different premises from which HE and FE
perceive further-higher education and their different discourses. At the end of the
day it may well be that in further-higher education there are those who are arguing
from different premises and will never agree. The lesson for further-higher
education policy implementation is that this is an inevitable consequence of the
cyclical phases of organising that is a feature of tertiary education and the plural
rationalities and contexts of legitimation that coexist there.
This chapter has defined the concepts of boundary work, boundary institutions and
boundary organisations and explored the use of boundary objects at the furtherhigher
interface as a process and against the context in which they operate and in
which they are institutionalised. The properties of boundaries at the further-higher
interface and the boundary paradoxes of operating under conditions of institutional
duality have been examined. This has been explored as a process against the
context of institutional and organisational changes in further-higher education and
a wider political economy.
The hybrid organisational forms that are found in further-higher education reflect
and internalise its institutional duality. This chapter has explored these process of
institutionalising duality and hybridisation at the further-higher interface and
boundary work that takes place there as a dynamic process. The ‘clumsy 
256
institutions’ that are found in further-higher education are in effect adaptable and
flexible to the extent they can accommodate plural rationalities and deal with the
tensions generated as a consequence of institutional duality operate within and
between different authority and control structures and distinct institutional logics.
Part three of the thesis illustrates the theoretical and conceptual frameworks
developed in part two through examples of the general trends that have been
features of the configuration and institutionalisation of the further-higher interface
over the last twenty years. 
CONCEPTUALISING THE INTERFACE
BETWEEN ENGLISH FURTHER AND HIGHER
EDUCATION
Volume Two

William Gourley
A thesis submitted in fulfillment of the requirements for
the award of the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
Department of Educational Studies
October 2009
PART THREE 
257
CHAPTER NINE: NEW PUBLIC MANAGEMENT AND THE
FURTHER-HIGHER EDUCATION INTERFACE
While part two of this thesis has provided an analytical overview of the institutional
and organisational changes that have taken place in further-higher education this
chapter will illustrate these changes against a backdrop of wider reforms that were
taking place in the public sector. It explores the dynamics of the further-higher
interface and the boundary work that takes place at its interface in the context of a
wider political economy. The spread of NPM and managerialism in the public
sector and their influence on further-higher education are investigated and their
significance for understanding changes at the further-higher interface considered.
These changes have reflected a shift in the institutional logics that were found in
further-higher education as it has moved from a public sector or municipal form of
HE provision to one based upon a market led private sector business model. In
common with other changes that were taking place in the public sector at this time
these were associated with a neo-liberal emphasis on reducing the role of the state
and the introduction of competition and market forces. This chapter sets that
broader context in place for understanding the two significant shifts that would then
follow in further-higher education. These were the shift from ‘low policy’ to ‘high
policy’ and a move from the rhetoric of marketisation during ‘low policy’ to one of
structured collaboration and partnership during ‘high policy’. Respectively these
two phases are dealt with in greater detail in chapters Ten and Eleven. 
258
The chapter complements the framework developed in part two and grounds it in a
context set against a broader ideological shift to neo-liberalism and a political
economy against which further-higher provision can be compared and illustrated.
Its core purpose is to illustrate the analytical purchase of the conceptual framework
developed in part two for understanding further-higher education its interface and
the boundary work that takes place there.
Through selective illustrations of the processes and contexts in which boundary
work takes place in further-higher education, it demonstrates the utility of the
model developed in part two for understanding mechanisms of institutional and
organisational changes there. The transition from an administrative logic
subsumed under the oversight of local authorities and municipal HE during the pre
incorporation phase of further-higher education development to a market logic
based upon a private corporate model of delivery are then explored. Shifts in
incentives, preference structures and the choices faced by further-higher education
providers can then be contextualised within a setting that allows the exploration
and iteration of context and process in English further-higher education.
The marketisation, massification and corporatisation that took place over the last
twenty years were part of a wider movement of reform in the public sector that was
at once ideological, reformist and contested. This movement is generally referred
to under the umbrella term of NPM and is associated with the introduction of
marketisation and managerialism in the public sector. 
259
In terms of understanding the increasing diversity and differentiation of
organisational forms in further-higher education and how that has impacted on its
ability to contribute to widening participation these changes need to be
contextualised more extensively against global shifts in how public sector services
were being delivered. This chapter considers the rise of NPM in the public sector
and the impact of these shifts and changes in how the management and
coordination of further-higher provision and its interface was influenced by these
trends. While NPM was a very broad movement its introduction to further-higher
education was complex and it was introduced at different speeds and intensity in
the old and new universities and in further-higher providers.
The reform of further-higher education had led to fragmentation, diversity of
provision and increasing complexity in the delivery of further-higher provision with
the emergence of diverse organisational forms. Moreover there were fundamental
contradictions at work in delivering these reforms as there were elsewhere in the
public sector because of countervailing pressures towards the simultaneous
centralisation and delegation of delivery.
While the rhetoric of further-higher provision was to delegate decision making to
the lowest levels, in reality further-higher education had become increasingly
centralised through targets and performance indicators and other output measures
associated with the rise of NPM and managerialism. This marked in the
terminology of grid-group a general shift up grid.
The institutional duality of further-higher education and coexistence of different 
260
institutional logics originating in the separate sector legacies of FE and HE
complicated these transitions further. Parallel systems of funding, planning and
quality assurance arrangements made the alignment of different sector goals,
institutional logics, incentives and organisational preferences in further-higher
education problematic. With further-higher education delivered in one sector, the
FE sector, it was largely shaped by the institutional environment and institutional
arrangements of the HE sector. In effect policy making was dominated by HE and
its associated boundary organisations.
The transformations and transitions explored and illustrated here were influenced
by the legacies of the separate sector identities, organisational cultures and
operating practices that had existed in FE and HE previously These contributed to
the ‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education, that of aligning different interests
and values of diverse FE and HE providers within further-higher provision.
Mapping the general trends of the transition to NPM in further-higher education
and how the further-higher interface was reconfigured as a consequence of the
introduction of the reforms was conceptualised in an earlier chapter through the
use of the grid-group heuristic. The heuristic captured how further-higher education
has been categorised and classified in the past and how the institutionalisation of
such a system of classification could be understood.
Secondly, how can the configurations of transactions and exchanges that are
embedded at the further-higher interface conceptualised in part two be illustrated 
261
through situating these exchanges in a wider political economy of further-higher
education?
Thirdly how can boundary work and the changing roles and functions of boundary
organisations and boundary objects that mediated the further-higher interface
during ‘low policy’ be understood and illustrated?
Finally, what is the role and function of further-higher education for widening
participation and access to HE and just how can the ‘wicked problem’ of aligning
equity and social justice issues with the drive to marketisation and massification be
understood as part of the ‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education?
The transition from ‘low policy’ to ‘high policy’ in further-higher education is
contextualised against a backdrop of these reforms and the fundamental
ideological shifts that marked the transition from oversight of further-higher
education by the municipal or public sector of HE (the old polytechnics and FECs)
to a private corporate model. During this transition the boundaries of FE and HE
blurred as the ‘rules of the game’ that oversaw them were modified.
In other words both dimensions of grid and group shifted. There was a shift up grid
that followed an increase in external accountability in further-higher education
leading to a convergence through quality assurance, a shift to an audit society
based upon a modified HE model and an increased focus upon the student as
consumer requiring standardised forms of information on quality of further-higher
provision in various codified forms. Secondly there was a blurring of group as old 
262
sector and inter-organisational divides blurred or were subject to a process of
hybridisation. The institutional logics that characterised the pre incorporation
institutional environment changed were gradually reshaped as these reforms took
root.
These institutional and organisational transitions cannot just be understood as
dichotomies or as points on a continuum between hierarchy and market. A
contextual and relational approach is needed that can capture the iteration of
context and process and the simultaneous operation of plural organisational forms
and structures of accountability, control and authority in further-higher education.
The organisational field in which further-higher education is embedded was
undergoing a fundamental transformation. The blurring of the group boundaries
between the public and private sectors and shifts in the institutionalisation of the
‘rules of the game’ reflected wider changes. However, the resilience of prior
institutional arrangements, classifications and categorisation of further-higher
education was to retain an influence long after the further-higher sector was initially
reconfigured.
The role of further-higher education in these transitions cannot be understood in
isolation from the broader shifts in the HE sector that was also being reconfigured
and reclassified. In other words further-higher education can only be understood as
a part of a wider HE organisational field of which it is a sub component and subordinate
part. Further-higher education and university based HE are intrinsically
linked in a functionally significant relation of inter-dependency and mutual 
263
symbiosis within one field of practice. The disjunctures of practice found there
mark the structural fault lines of further-higher education in relation to its links with
university sector of HE.
A Neo-Liberal Hegemony?
The institutional and organisational changes that were taking place in furtherhigher
education were a reflection of a more complex set of wider reforms, interest
and broader macro shifts in the institutional environment of further-higher
education that mirrored those occurring in the public sector. These marked a disembedding
of further-higher education from its local authority roots and its
municipal origins and the rise of the market, marketisation and competition in
further-higher education and HE. At the same time a shift in the incentive
structures, preferences and organisational dispositions of further-higher education
providers was undergoing a fundamental transformation.
In further-higher provision these changes had begun with incorporation although
these changes had been proposed by the Jarratt Report (1985) on pre
incorporation HE and the audit commission’s investigations (Holloway, 1998) on
FE. One of the consequences of these reports was changes in the institutionalised
‘rules of the game’ that would result in a reconfiguration of the ecology and
institutional landscape and contours of further-higher education. Both reports
recommended that the delivery of HE and FE could be more business like and that
reforms were necessary to make them more efficient and provide better value for
money. These were the basis of the NPM reforms that would follow. 
264
The transfer of public assets to the new ‘private’ corporations redefined at a stroke
the further-higher interface via incorporation in 1988 and 1992 and how these
public assets were effectively reclassified as private under the control of the newly
independent FE and HE corporations. The spread of private sector business
practices including business format franchising in the delivery of further-higher
education was one instance of these broader trends as was the shift to introduce
market forces and competition into further-higher education. These underpinned
the drive to massification of further-higher education especially during the pre
Dearing phase of ‘low policy’.
Thus the marketisation and massification of further-higher education and of HE
more generally has been an ongoing process. The abolition of student grants and
the introduction of student loans and tuition fees in the late 1990’s and the
introduction of variable fees in the early 2000’s accelerated these trends. However,
while marketisation was targeted at a new consumerist culture among furtherhigher
providers there was little sign of sector legacies or the influence of
disciplinary cultures disappearing completely.
As students began to bear more of the costs of their education and students were
reclassified as customers or consumers, the role of the market in widening
participation and access took on a more significant role. At the same time the
establishment of the Office of Fair Access (OFFA) in 2004 was meant to ensure
that poorer students would not suffer, through overseeing provider’s strategies for
making bursaries available. This created its own tensions in further-higher 
265
education. This was a symptom of the ‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education
of how to align equity and justice issues with the marketisation and massification of
HE while increasing student numbers.
The difficulties of aligning market forces with equity and justice issues and the
problem of how to coordinate and steer an increasingly diverse set of
organisational forms in a fragmented system were inevitably creating transaction
costs.
The common goal of widening participation that united all providers was basically
subsumed in tensions between competitive and collaborative institutional
pressures that had ebbed and flowed at different points in the development of the
field. During the era of ‘low policy’ the market had been encouraged. Following the
transition to ‘high policy’ post the Dearing Report collaboration and semi structured
partnerships were encouraged. Such shifts in the ‘rules of the game’ could not
happen over night.
‘Wicked Problems’ and New Public Management
One of the outcomes of the spread of NPM reforms was an increase in system
complexity and a shift in the roles and functions of intermediary boundary
organisations that sat at the further-higher interface. The problems of coordination
across sector and inter-organisational boundaries and the aligning of multiple
interests across these divides generated issues typical of ‘wicked problems’. The
existence of ambiguity, contested values between FE and HE rooted in separate 
266
histories and legacies and vested interests contributed to and reinforced the
institutional duality of further-higher education.
The term ‘wicked problem’ was introduced in earlier chapters and was used to help
conceptualise the increasing complexity and volatility of the system of furtherhigher
education provision, the ambiguity and contestability of its values and the
ambiguity of policy making especially during the phase of ‘low policy’. The impact
of institutional duality on the operation of the further-higher interface and the
difficulties in managing the tensions generated at the interface and across interorganisational
boundaries created this ‘wicked problem’ of how to align
autonomous and independent organisations that were also inter-dependent
through a semi-compulsory bilateral dependency characterised by medium to high
levels of asset specificity.
Further-higher education and HE faced a fundamental tension of how to satisfy
equity issues in getting more non traditional students into HE, while at the same
time, to broaden access and increase participation rates as the provision of HE
became more diverse and subject to increasing differentiation and marketisation.
Did these processes reproduce relative inequality and status and reputation orders
within the further-higher organisational field or alternatively widen and broaden
access to non traditional groups? The argument behind NPM reforms was that the
market would enhance the economy, effectiveness and efficiency of public
services. But would the market work in where further-higher education issues of
public interest, accountability and fairness were highly significant and debated
heatedly? 
267
Other tensions originated in the different institutional logics underpinning the mix of
competition and coordination at the further-higher interface. Examples included
how to align those FE and HE providers who deliver similar qualifications and in
effect could be in competition with each other when being exhorted to collaborate
(in the past HNC’s, for example might be delivered either in a further-higher
education provider or in HE).
Reforming Municipal and Public Sector HE
Prior to 1988 most further-higher education was delivered through partnerships
between the polytechnics and further-higher education providers with relatively
little being delivered through the chartered universities that predated the creation of
the polytechnics. The local education authorities had oversight of the planning,
funding and quality assurance of this type of further-higher education. It was
effectively the agency that oversaw that part of the municipal or public sector of HE
delivery. The chartered universities were outside of their remit and had
considerable autonomy for designing and delivering HE.
As mentioned above the role of the Jarratt Report (1985) on HE and the audit
commission’s work on FE (Audit Commission, 1985, Holloway, 1998) prepared the
way to adopt a more ‘business like’ approach to delivering HE and by default
further-higher education. These reports set the context and prepared the way for
incorporation and marketisation that would be features of the late 1980’s onwards. 
268
Further-higher education could be considered as either a private good or a merit
good. Students gain private benefits from receiving HE and the argument was that
they would have to pay more for this. At the same time HE could be described as a
merit good with considerable evidence suggesting that a highly educated
workforce is more economically productive and likely to fuel economic growth and
prosperity.
Moreover, not all traditional HE providers accepted that further-higher education
was or should be a legitimate form of HE (Parry, 2008). This is an important point
to emphasise. Further-higher education was considered in many quarters to be an
example of ‘matter out of place’, an anomalous form of provision that was neither
FE nor HE in some situations challenged the existing status quo.
After the incorporation of the polytechnics and FECs the role and function of the
local authorities would change as the assets, resources and staffing
responsibilities hitherto under their control were transferred to the newly
independent and autonomous corporations. This marked the beginnings of an
acceleration of NPM reforms in further-higher education, prepared as mentioned
earlier via the Jarratt and audit commission reports. With these reforms the spread
of private sector business practices and managerialism into further-higher
education became more comprehensive. 
269
Marketisation and ‘Low Policy’
The marketisation of further-higher education via the sub contracting of courses
normally delivered in HE that were usually referred to as franchising, was a
prominent feature of the post 1988 institutional environment and another instance
of the wider reforms taking place in the public sector. They were not
uncontroversial. Like much that was changing in the broader public sector these
reforms, inasmuch as they affected further-higher education, resulted in the
reconfiguration of the incentives and preferences structures of organisational
decision makers in further-higher education through the introduction of competition
and market like mechanisms. This attempt to incentivise provision along market
driven lines was prominent in the early phase of ‘low policy’ identified by Parry and
Thompson (2002). In 1996 the HEFCE (1996) reiterated its commitment to market
forces and competition as the key mechanism for coordination delivering furtherhigher
education.
This initiative required both structural changes but also a cultural change and a
reconfiguration of the organisational preferences, incentives and structures under
which further-higher education was delivered. It was this reconfiguration of
preferences and incentives in further-higher education that the grid-group heuristic
that was developed in chapter Six investigated. It aimed to illustrate the connection
between a wider political economy and social structure and modes of organising at
the further-higher interface and the positioning strategies of further-higher
education providers. 
270
Throughout the twenty year period of this case study the one constant in a period
of frequent and often turbulent institutional and organisational change was that
these fundamental tensions between competition and collaboration persisted
whether during the phase of ‘low policy’ or ‘high policy’. Sector loyalties and
different organisational identities were constant features of these transformations
and further influenced the positioning strategies of further-higher education
providers (Smith, 2008).
The institutional duality of further-higher education therefore left its legacies in as
much as whatever the structural changes taking place, the identities and
preferences of organisational decision makers at the further-higher interface and
within the further-higher education organisational field were strongly influenced by
past histories and sector identities that still had a powerful impact. In further-higher
education loyalties were often to a sector rather than a type of provision (Parry,
2008).
The Education Reform Act (1988) had begun a trend that would lead to the
reconfiguration of the further-higher interface and a reclassification and
categorisation of further-higher education. This reform shifted responsibilities from
the local education authorities for the oversight of FECs and polytechnics
culminating in the incorporation of polytechnics in 1988 and of FECs in 1992 and
the transfer of funding, planning and quality assurance functions across the FE and
HE sector. It was reinforced by other reforms that consolidated these transitions
but during the phase of ‘low policy’ prior to Dearing these were remarkable mainly
for the lack of clarity as to who had roles and responsibilities at the boundaries of 
271
FE and HE for co-ordinating the further-higher interface. During this phase there
was little strategic planning of further-higher education and policy making was
largely reactive.
As mentioned earlier the de-institutionalisation of this public or municipal sector of
FE and HE as it then existed and its reconfiguration and reclassification along
market and business like lines marked a shift down group, as the municipal sector
was dis-embedded, and up grid as there were increasing amounts of external
scrutiny through audit of provision.
In effect a pure form of marketisation was a shift from the hierarchical and
egalitarian quadrants of the grid-group matrix to the individualist quadrant.
However, what reigned in further-higher education and HE were quasi-markets or
managed markets which were more akin to an alliance of individualism and
hierarchy with the latter being imposed indirectly through performance indicators
and targets. Thus the institutional environment of further-higher education
produced a set of institutional arrangements that in terms of grid-group could be
described as a coalition of individualism and hierarchy.
The contradictions that were evident in these arrangements reflected the wider
contradictions of the NPM reforms outlined in the previous chapter. The tension
between centralisation and delegation, organisational autonomy and control and
inter-organisational collaboration and competition in an increasingly complex and
fragmented organisational field were played out at the further-higher interface. 
272
This first phase of this de-institutionalisation of the existing institutional
environment of had further-higher education involved the ‘creative destruction’ of
the institutional frameworks that had previously set the agenda for FE and HE ever
since the expansion that followed the Robbins report that had led to the creation of
polytechnics in the 1960’s. That transition began with the move from elite to mass
HE education as identified by Trow (1973) which he defined as a move from a
system in which approximately 15% enter HE into a mass system in which about
50% do. This transition had been most rapid between 1988 and 1994 with most of
it centred on further-higher education the old polytechnics, slightly less in the old
universities but still more than in where the pace of expansion was slowest.
In reality, the Robbins model reflected a shift from an elite model that predated the
creation of the polytechnics and by the time that the binary divide was abolished a
transition to a mass HE system was well underway. The role of further-higher
provision in this transition was poorly understood in terms of its scale, scope, role
and function. This was an era of ‘low policy’, a phase of ad hoc bricolage in furtherhigher
education. The following chapter explores this phase in more detail.
Most notably HE was no longer to be seen purely as a ‘detached’ autonomous
sector immune from external influences but would be subject to market forces and
accountability mechanisms designed to enhance its economic function in servicing
the economy and broader economic interests. These would gradually become
more transparent through the rise of the audit society (Power, 1997) and an
increasingly prominent role for the boundary organisations that would act as
mediators between FE and HE especially following Dearing. 
273
These initial NPM reforms were underpinned by neo-liberal hegemony and an
agenda that claimed it would drive up the efficiency of the public sector. These
claims were legitimised in academic circles by the influence of ideas associated
with transaction cost economics, public choice theory and principal agent theory
discussed in chapters four and six in part Two of the thesis.
These were basically neo-classical economic theories that prioritised economic self
interest and a more limited role for the state and conceptualised decision making
processes largely through the lens of a methodological individualism. They lacked
a focus on context and tended to argue for an under socialised concept of
economic behaviour and not to focus on the embeddedness of economic action in
social relations. Although they recognised in the guise of new institutional
economics the role of institutions in reducing transaction costs and in overseeing
transactions and exchanges they nevertheless tended to remove any analysis from
their actual setting and lacked a relational and holistic as well as a historical
approach to understanding the dynamics of human behaviour. Moreover, they
offered no vehicle for analysing the social and cultural and cognitive construction of
preferences such as the one offered by the grid-group heuristic.
The axiomatic claim of this neo-liberal shift was that rational (or boundedly rational)
economic agents should be allowed to pursue self interest in a market economy. In
further-higher education this was operationalised through the use of quasi-markets
and the use of funding mechanisms that were demand led and aligned with
government policy. Despite the fact that no pure markets ever operated in further-
274
higher education, the ideological claims of the supporters of the market were
prominent and hegemonic at this stage in the development of public sector reform
and at the further-higher interface. Randle and Brady (1997, 1997a) among others
have written about these reforms in FE and Deem (1998) in HE. A more extensive
review of these works was given in the literature review in chapter two.
Quasi-markets or managed markets constituted the institutional arrangements, or
governance structures, through which the central steer of government was
implemented and the targets and performance indicators that were used as
mediums for the indirect steering of further-higher education for the purpose of
widening participation and access.
During the phase ‘low policy’, however, the policy steer of central government was
relatively limited, an example of a weak grid institutional environment. Policy was
ambiguous with the roles and functions of boundary organisations operating at the
further-higher interface unclear.
Stop go policies that had expanded HE and then implemented a cap on student
numbers in HE in 1994, following the expansion of student numbers that had
characterised the previous five or six years, was implemented at the same time as
the FE sector was being encouraged to expand rapidly and this clouded the picture
further. It was not until after Dearing and the rise of ‘high policy’ that a more
interventionist steer was to provide a greater degree of funding stability for furtherhigher
education providers and ameliorate some of the opportunism and short
termism that had been a feature of the ‘franchise experiment’. It is a plausible claim 
275
that the evidence base that existed at this time on the scale and scope of furtherhigher
education was limited and that policy makers did not play a active or proactive
strategic role during this phase of ‘low policy’. This was an era of ad hoc
making do and bricolage.
Incorporation was followed by reforms to the employment contract for staff in FE
who had been previously employed by the local authorities and many of which
would be involved in delivering further-higher education which then led to a
prolonged industrial dispute in the FE sector (Mather et al, 2007). The differences
in terms and conditions under which staff in the non university sector of furtherhigher
education were employed included longer contact hours and this in
combination with a lack of any significant research presence marks a clear
difference in terms and conditions of FE staff delivering further-higher education in
comparison with staff in the university sector. These differences remain significant
for higher level work today and the delivery model of further-higher education and
the capacity of further-higher education providers to provide an equivalent HE
experience.
NPM is not a unified body of practices (Pollitt,1993, 2000) nor has it been applied
uniformly (Hood, 1991). Some claim that in the case of FE it has not become
internalised as a dominant value system (Hanaggan, 2007). Indeed in the instance
of further-higher education the impact of NPM remains not only contested territory
but institutional duality of further-higher education makes the dynamics of reform
even more complex. Although there have been separate studies of the impact of 
276
NPM and managerialism in FE and HE as separate sectors, there are none that
appear to deal with their impact on further-higher education.
However, there are a number of common themes in NPM that are significant.
Firstly it stresses the decentralisation of decision making and a focus on product
rather than process: an initiative which has led to the emergence of targets and
performance indicators as measures of performance. Secondly it argues for the
introduction of competitive mechanisms in the public sector as a means of
restructuring the incentives and preferences of public servants and to incentivise
them to use private sector practices. Thirdly, it is associated with managerialism
and the claim that managers should have the autonomy to manage and be given
discretion and autonomy in doing so. Fourthly it argues for a reduction in the role of
the state or a ‘hollowing out’ of the state. Finally, it stresses technical accountability
and the increasing use of audit to ensure accountability. While this list is not
exhaustive and other variations of NPM could reasonably be included it was
generally associated with privatisation in the public sector and with a shift to a neoliberal
economic argument frequently but not always associated with a commitment
to individualism and rational pursuit of self interest.
These reforms were occurring across the public sector and were part of a broader
reconfiguration of the role of the state vis-à-vis public service providers (Ferlie et
al., 1996; Clarke and Newman, 1997; Pollitt and Bouckaert, 2000). Ferlie (2008)
argues that in the case of HE the reforms reflected broader societal trends and
although HE constitutes a strongly institutionalised field that had in the past
operated with considerable autonomy there were fundamental shifts taking place 
277
that would limit that autonomy. As it applied to further-higher education NPM had a
mixed response.
Elsewhere, the distinction between FE and HE and further-higher education as a
hybrid form of provision has been conceptualised in terms of Bourdieu’s concept of
field. Maton (2008) compared the old polytechnics and traditional universities as
fields with differing degrees of autonomy from external influences and
demonstrated how the polytechnics were more subject to external influences that
reduced their autonomy. This gave greater power to vocational and business
interests who had been relatively weak in terms of their influence in the traditional
universities. The point being that it was easier to implement change under these
circumstances when provisional interests were relatively weak. Given that NPM
reform had extensively been introduced in other areas of the public sector, and that
its reception had been mixed, the introduction of NPM and managerialism in the
old polytechnic sector and in FECs was likely to produce a hybrid rather than
simply a total transformation of how they were run. However, the reforms were
introduced more rapidly in the old municipal or public sector of HE which were
used to external and central regulation of their provision that it would in the old
universities who had always enjoyed greater levels of autonomy.
If transposed to an analysis of further-higher education providers an investigation
of the introduction of NPM and managerialist reforms would undoubtedly reveal
that further-higher education was subject to even greater external influences than
the old polytechnic or new universities and as a field operated under conditions of
restricted autonomy in comparison to the traditional HE sector. Not only had they 
278
always been dependent on external bodies to award their qualifications, as they
were for an HE partner for awarding their HE qualifications or ‘brand’, but they
were more familiar with centralised direction and audit based upon an inspection
model rather than the peer model that was typical of the post incorporated HE
sector.
The corporatisation of FE and HE marks a shift in group in terms of the identities of
further-higher education providers as organisations but also in terms of the blurring
of categorical distinction between the public and private sectors. The transfer of
assets and resources from the public sector to the private sector following
incorporation was a clear example of this.
The literature on NPM and managerialism throws some light on the process of
reform that has been taking place at the further-higher interface over the last
twenty years. In common with reforms in the wider public sector the public-private
boundary has blurred and a shift to an audit society is evident representing a
strengthening of the oversight of the state albeit by indirect measures and means.
This has incurred costs, duplication and fundamental shifts in power in furtherhigher
education. At the same time it has contributed to a rapid expansion in
participation rates in HE.
There was also a blurring of grid as the ‘rules of the game’ changed and the
configuration of the institutional arrangements or governance structures of furtherhigher
education hybridised and mutated. Further-higher education was becoming 
279
neither FE nor HE but exhibited elements of both. And dichotomies were too crude
a device to capture this process of hybridisation.
The pace of change in the introduction of NPM has differed in FE and in HE but
both have been affected. At the further-higher interface responses to a realignment
of the ‘rules of the game’ have taken place in the form of the hybridisation of
further-higher education and the organisational forms found at the further-higher
interface. The configuration and re-configuration of transactions and exchanges at
the further-higher interface at different stages of development of its organisational
field, the institutionalisation and internalisation of institutional duality in furtherhigher
education and the emergence of hybrid organisational forms during a phase
of marketisation underpinned by the neo-liberal hegemony of NPM reforms were
quickly followed by a counter trend towards structured collaboration and semicompulsory
inter-organisational collaboration.
Chapter Seven dealt with the configuration of transactions and exchanges at the
further-higher interface and explore them in terms of the structural attributes of
transactions and in particular the dimensions of asset specificity and the structural
context of a political economy of further-higher education that also focused on the
social, political, cognitive and cultural dimensions of economic coordination in
further-higher education.
One of the more significant findings of that chapter was that the dimension of asset
specificity known as brand name capital had been radically reconfigured as furtherhigher
education was given a higher profile in delivering higher level work post 
280
Dearing. In particular the introduction of the foundation degree in 2001 was an
important turning point. This intermediate level HE qualification was to become the
special mission of further-higher education with its emphasis on part time,
vocational and its employer led nature.
In 2008 further-higher providers were given the powers to seek degree awarding
powers for foundation degree for the first time. At the time of writing no furtherhigher
provider had been awarded these but there were now mechanisms in place
to apply. This was potentially a fundamental shift in the asset specific character of
further-higher provision.
Neo-liberalism was a politically imposed discourse (Olsen and Peters, 2005) and in
the context of how it influenced the configuration of the further-higher interface it
has contributed to the redefinition and re-categorisation and classification of the
existing sector and organisational configurations found at the further-higher
education as market driven during the phase of ‘low policy’. Chapter Six explored
the classification of the further-higher interface through the grid-group heuristic.
Here it will be pointed out that further-higher education remained somewhat
anomalous and ambiguous in the broader classification of HE and in Douglas’
terms represented ‘matter out of place’.
The dis-embedding of pre existing institutional and organisational contexts through
incorporation from 1988 onwards via marketisation had witnessed a radical
restructuring of the social relations and inter-organisational collaborations taking
place in further-higher education. This was then followed by a re-embedding of the 
281
role of the central state through an emphasis on structured collaboration in furtherhigher
education post Dearing and an emphasis on semi-compulsory interorganisational
partnerships within the further-higher organisational field. This
meant that the role and function of boundary institutions and boundary
organisations in overseeing this took on an even greater significance.
Chapter Eight has discussed the role of boundary organisations and boundary
objects in this process. Chapters Ten and Eleven will illustrate these further
through an investigation of the boundary work that took place during ‘low policy’
and how that differed after the shift to ‘high policy’. The following section briefly
sets the scene for this transition in further-higher education.
From ‘Low Policy’ to ‘High Policy’: Legacies of Institutional Duality
The reforms mentioned above would gradually evolve over time and disseminate
across HE: including the internalisation of the tensions that emerged as a
consequence of the institutional duality and convergent and divergent institutional
pressures operating in the further-higher organisational field. To return to the neoinstitutional
analysis of part two institutional pressures within the further-higher
organisational field towards isomorphism and the coercive, normative and mimetic
isomorphism that pushed further-higher providers to similar organisational forms
that co-existed with divergent pressures towards differentiation and complexity of
organisational forms as well as hybridisation. 
282
Coercive isomorphism emanating from the vertical pressures generated from the
centre, especially funding and quality related pressures, coexisted with horizontal
pressures that represented the normative and mimetic isomorphic pressures of
new institutionalism. These were not necessarily aligned and indeed there was a
general feeling that the rise of the audit society had reduced the autonomy of at
least some providers through a strengthening of grid through the means of audit.
At one and the same time the consequence of institutional duality would be that
convergent isomorphic institutional pressures would operate simultaneously with
divergent institutional pressures which were in part the result of the increasing
complexity of the system would operate in contradiction to these. For example the
tensions between competition and the use of market mechanisms and the stress
on managed markets and centralised interventionism were obvious. This was a
fundamental tension in NPM where the stress on delegation and centralisation sat
with increasing centralisation through indirect controls such as targets and
performance indicators.
During ‘low policy’ as FE was encouraged to expand its student numbers and FE
work, HE student numbers were then suddenly capped. This created conflicting
messages for further-higher providers while short term annual funding cycles also
made the phase somewhat unstable. The volatility of further-higher education sat
uneasily with claims that there would be a convergence of organisational practices
and identities. 
283
Further-higher education also constituted the politically weakest link in the delivery
of an extended mass system of HE inasmuch as it had not been as well organised
in terms of mobilising its interests collectively as HE had. Throughout the time
frame covered in this thesis and especially in the early phase of ‘low policy’ it was
HE that largely set the agenda and determined policy for further-higher education.
A constant feature of further-higher education is that it was delivered in the FE
sector in was under the oversight of another sector of HE. Thus transactions and
exchanges across the further-higher interface were asymmetrical in terms of
resources and disparities in power, status and reputation while these disparities
were re-enforced in the transition to a mass system of HE and even as furtherhigher
education matured.
During the phase of ‘low policy’ the market and the introduction of competition was
encouraged while after the shift to ‘high policy’ structured collaboration and a
redefinition of the role and functions of boundary organisations was implemented.
The shifting role of boundary organisations, boundary objects and changes in the
configuration of the further-higher interface and the transactions and exchanges
that took place as this transition took place are considered in the next two
chapters. Boundary work at the further-higher interface is illustrated against the
background of a shift in the institutional environment from ‘low policy’ to ‘high
policy’. 
284
Hybrids and Hybridisation
The organisational forms that were found in further-higher education were based
upon franchising, consortia, validation or accreditation and various mixes of direct
and indirect funding. These were primarily commercial transactions built upon the
contractualism associated with marketisation. Yet each was also a hybrid or a mix
of different modes of organising that included mixes of market, hierarchy and
egalitarian or sect forms of mutuality.
Thus conceptualising them as dualities of market and non market categories can
only lead so far. For this reason the four generic modes of organising identified
through the grid-group heuristic and the various mixes of asset specificity that was
examined in chapter Seven are better able to capture the nuances and processes
of hybridity at the further-higher interface.
It is argued that further-higher education is a hybrid and that dualistic concepts are
unable to capture the complexities, tensions and paradoxes that are a
consequence of the institutional duality of further-higher education. The
internalisation of external institutional duality through hybrid organisational forms is
a ‘clumsy solution’ to these tensions.
Elsewhere references to ‘clumsy institutions’ and hybrid organisational forms in
further-higher education have been made (see chapter Eight). In that context,
transactional forms were conceptualised as being embedded in specific
configurations of social relations and social organisation at the further-higher 
285
interface and in particular modes of cognition and organisational preference
formation that has also been conceptualised through the grid-group heuristic.
However, ‘clumsy institutions’ are in reality flexible and adaptable. What makes
them so is that they are able to accommodate institutional duality and plural
rationalities operating across the FE and HE sector and at the further-higher
interface at the same time. Indeed, they are at least in part adaptations to the
complexity and ambiguities and anomalies typically found in ‘wicked problems’
such as further-higher education.
They are difficult to pigeon hole or compartmentalise because they are constantly
adapting, mutating and organising at the margins and boundaries positioning of
further-higher education. These adaptive strategies and organisational in the
further-higher organisational field can only be understood relationally and in
context as a process matched against constantly shifting contexts. This has been
attempted through the device of a longitudinal theoretical case study in this thesis.
As further-higher education has moved towards more structured and semicompulsory
forms of collaborative partnerships, the classification of further-higher
education became more problematic. One of the most significanct of these
problems was the increasing redundancy of existing conventions that distinguished
divisions between the public and private and other based upon a division into
sectors. Indeed, further-higher education was neither FE nor HE, nor public or
private, nor further or higher but a hybrid. There was a problem in how to classify 
286
hybrids that did not fit anywhere in an existing system. This was exacerbated by
the NPM reforms and shift to managerialism mentioned earlier.
The policy trends that were underpinning this blurring of public and private in
further-higher education and reconfiguring the interface had largely emerged as a
reactive rather than a pro active act of policy formation in further-higher education.
Not only was the statistical data available problematic but making comparison
across sectors and transitions between FE and HE but the scale and scope of
further-higher provision was poorly evidenced prior to Dearing.
Therefore institutional duality took a variety of forms that meant different things in
each sector. Different terminologies and systems for classifying further-higher
education and separate conventions and methods for gathering statistical data
across FE and HE created problems in mapping the scale and scope of and
further-higher education the extent to which students transferred across sector
boundaries. Consequently different terminologies and conventions were applied in
FE and HE to different things.
With the grid dimension encapsulating the roles, rules and systems of classification
that oversaw the operation of further-higher education and the group dimension
capturing the dynamics of boundary work at the further-higher interface the gridgroup
heuristic captures the vertical and horizontal differentiation of the
organisational field of which further-higher education is a sub-component part. It
thus maps the institutional ecology and organisational landscape of further-higher
provision. It outlines conceptually all possible institutional and organisational 
287
structural spaces within which organisational decision makers strategise and
position themselves in practice and the niches and interstices across which
boundary spanning practices take place. It is also helps identify possible points of
tension or ambiguity that are a result of the institutional duality of further-higher
education where anomalies are likely to be found in the classification and
categorisation of its provision.
It is at the boundaries or at the interface of the quadrants that anomaly and
ambiguity is likely and here that boundary work takes place to mediate and
translate the separate identities, structures and cultures of FE and HE and the
hybrid of these that is further-higher education is most significant. The persistence
of strong sector legacies premised upon the different histories and traditions of FE
and HE have been illustrated by Parry et al (2008)
As further-higher providers are in effect legally distinct and autonomous
organisations each with their own modus operandi, the tension between
organisational autonomy and dependence is ever present. The result is an
inevitable degree of tension, the outcome of a dialectical institutional duality
through which vertical and horizontal institutional and organisational pressures
within the organisational field are played out in further-higher education.
In essence further-higher education is a hybrid and the outcome of the interplay of
the vertical and the horizontal axis outlined in the original grid-group heuristic was
a ultimately a mix of different permutations of asset specificity and configurations at
the further-higher interface. The interrelationship of further-higher education 
288
providers to regulatory agencies and boundary organisations can only be
understood as a process conceptualised against the specific institutional contexts
in which boundary work takes place.
Chapter Seven considered the relationship between the structural attributes of
transactions and exchanges found in further-higher education and how they were
configured at the further-higher interface against the context of the institutional
arrangements that oversaw them and regulated them. In terms of NPM reforms the
transactional nature of these exchanges was implied to be coterminous with
market transactions and contractualism. Theoretical contributions from economic
sociology, organisational theorists and the sociology of science and technology
studies have been shown to throw doubt on this. Economic transactions and
exchanges at the further-higher interface are embedded in institutional contexts
and configurations of social relations, inter-sector and inter-organisational
collaboration and practices that predate the contemporary landscape of furtherhigher
education. The influence of the sector legacies, identities and systems of
funding, quality and planning that predate the reconfiguration of the FE and HE
sectors in 1988 and 1992 remain pervasive.
Transaction cost economics argued that the matching of the transactional
attributes of exchanges at the further-higher education interface with the
institutional arrangements that oversaw them would be decided on efficiency
grounds. This economic argument tends to ignore the wider political economy of
further-higher education and to ignore the social, cultural and cognitive and political 
289
dimensions and contexts through which the transactions flow. Moreover, the
significance of the historical legacies of FE and HE sectors is largely ignored.
In reality further-higher education has rarely followed a rational top down planning
model with the phase of ‘low policy’ in particular being characterised by an ad hoc
form of reactive planning and bricolage. The usefulness of the model developed in
this thesis is that it has identified analytically the plural frames of reference at work
at any one time in the further-higher organisational field.
During ‘low policy’ when markets were prioritised there was some element of truth
in the claim that further-higher education was subject to competitive pressures;
although these markets mechanisms represented managed markets rather than
pure markets. With the transition to ‘high policy’ and semi-compulsory structured
collaboration this was less easy to sustain as a claim as a more interventionist
policy was adopted that prioritised collaboration. The transition from an institutional
logic based on competition to a one based on collaboration would take time to bed
in and influence the decision making and organisational preferences of furtherhigher
providers.
Nevertheless transactions and exchanges at the further-higher interface are
configured in complex ways and the impact of the institutional duality of furtherhigher
education in ways that are significant in influencing the emergence of
diverse organisational forms. Hybridisation is arguably a response to the tensions
created through the institutional duality of further-higher education. 
290
The twenty year period that delimits this theoretical case study saw profound
institutional shifts and at times turbulent changes. Throughout the thesis these
changes have been explored conceptually and analytically. This chapter has
illustrated the broad analytical framework through which these changes have been
conceptualised against the background of NPM reforms and the introduction of
managerialism in further-higher education.
It has used the institutional turning points at which the further-higher interface was
reconfigured and reclassified as historical contexts to investigate shifting
processes and trends at the interface. This is in line with the overall direction of the
thesis to use a conceptually informed longitudinal case study to explore the
iteration of context and process at the further-higher interface.
The changing role of boundary organisations, boundary objects and fundamental
shifts in the configuration of transactions and exchanges at the further-higher
interface and its classification have been illustrated through a contextualisation of
the phase of ‘low policy’ and the franchise experiment followed by the era of ‘high
policy’ and the move to structured collaboration and a more interventionist and pro
active strategy for further-higher education.
The following two chapters illustrate some of these conceptual and theoretical
insights through separate coverage of the phase of ‘low policy’ followed by
coverage of the phase of ‘high policy’. 
291
CHAPTER TEN
‘LOW POLICY’
In the ten years or so that followed the incorporation of the polytechnics an era of
marketisation and ‘low policy’ typified the institutional environment of further-higher
education. In this low grid and low group institutional context the boundary
organisations that straddled the further-higher interface had an ambiguous role in
mediating sector divides. FE and HE sector bodies were largely insulated from
each other only occasionally working together in a systematic way with furtherhigher
delivery somewhat marginal to their main responsibilities. They operated
under parallel systems of funding, planning and quality assurance operating
according to different ‘rules of the game’. Neither the FE nor the HE bodies
established by the Further and Higher education Act of 1992 act had further-higher
education at the centre of their priorities.
Consequently boundary organisations such as the FEFC and HEFCE that
straddled the sector interface during this phase of ‘low policy’ operated in an
ambiguous policy environment with respect to further-higher delivery. Their main
responsibilities were to a particular sector. Although almost one in nine students in
HE were studying at an further-higher education provider for much of this phase in 
292
the development of further-higher education it was notable for its lack of influence
in setting the policy agenda which was dominated by HE bodies.
In this phase of ‘low policy’, moreover, there was a slim evidence base on the
scale and scope of further-higher provision in England to construct policy from.
Moreover, there was little that was written that was theoretical or conceptual in
tone that discussed emerging organisational forms or hybrid provision found in
further-higher education. Indeed, few accounts of further-higher education had
considered any fundamental rationale for dividing FE and HE into two different
sectors or in what ways that FE and HE were fundamentally different. Most
accounts dealt with administrative differences but rarely addressed philosophical
issues.
This chapter explores the organisational landscape and dynamics of this phase of
‘low policy’ and the characteristics of franchising as a hybrid organisational form. It
illustrates the role of franchising in coping with and internalising the institutional
duality of further-higher education. In so doing it connects franchising to the wider
political economy of further-higher education and contextualises it in its broader
analytical framework. It illustrates the dynamics of boundary work at the furtherhigher
interface during the phase of ‘low policy’ and explores the role and function
of boundary organisations in regulating it.
The chapter will explore this phase of ‘low policy’ and the role of marketisation in
further-higher education by drawing on the analytical framework developed in part
Two. It considers the relationship of the institutional environment to institutional 
293
arrangements in further-higher education during a phase that will be termed here
as the ‘franchise experiment’. The contribution of theory to policy implementation
will be highlighted throughout.
The lessons learned from analysing franchising and the relevance of private sector
business franchise models for understanding further-higher education is assessed
for the insights that they might provide in helping conceptualise the dynamics of
inter-organisational joint working in further-higher education.
The process of hybridisation in further-higher education, boundary work and the
role and function of boundary organisations and boundary objects during ‘low
policy’ are illustrated. The hybrid organisation forms that result are considered as
responses to the turbulent and often unstable institutional environment that typified
this phase of marketisation and experimentation. In the process of hybridisation it
is argued that institutional duality is internalised in the organisational practices of
further-higher providers and that coping mechanism evolve to deal with the
tensions that emerge at the further-higher interface.
Bricolage at Work: The Franchise Experiment
Franchising was a common organisational form to be found in further-higher
education. As a hybrid mode of delivery franchising has a number of lessons that
might be applied to understanding the dynamics of further-higher education. As an
illustration of how further-higher education was evolving, franchising is highlighted.
During the early phase of policy development in further-higher education, 
294
designated elsewhere as an era of ‘low policy’ or no policy (Parry et al, 2002),
franchising was a means providing a means to expand higher education provision
and provide some extra flexibility for the system. Due to the relatively unplanned
and ad hoc nature of this early phase in the evolution of further-higher education,
reminiscent of bricolage rather than planning, this phase will be designated as the
era of the ‘franchise experiment’.
This phase of the ‘franchise experiment’ is investigated and used to illustrate some
of the problems and issues under conditions of institutional duality. The institutional
contradictions that were consequence of operating under a dual institutional
environment within one organisational field were focussed on the emergence of
intermediate and hybrid modes of delivery at the further-higher interface. Arguably
these could be considered as adaptive responses to institutional duality.
Franchising was a hybrid organisational form that consists of a mix of market
mechanism and hierarchy and centralised and delegated control. As a terminology
applied to further-higher education during the phase of ‘low policy’ franchising was
not always used consistently to refer to the same organisational forms. It would
more accurately be described as the sub contracting of an HE brand to be
delivered off the shelf by a further-higher education provider at its own site. In
reality franchising was somewhat of a flexible concept loosely used as an umbrella
term to cover a range of organisational arrangements. It largely went unregulated
and was not well understood in terms of its scale, scope or dynamics during this
era of ‘low policy’. 
295
Hybridisation in the form of franchising can be considered an adaptive response to
the tensions that originated with the institutional duality of further-higher education.
These hybrid organisational forms effectively internalised the external institutional
duality of further-higher education by incorporating the tensions, paradoxes and
anomalies that are generated as a consequence. They were a source of flexibility
in an institutional environment that was generating contradictory institutional
pressures and forces on providers.
There was thus a functional relationship between further-higher education and the
university sector HE based upon the dominance of HE advocacy in shaping policy
making in further-higher education. The flexibility and adaptability that furtherhigher
education provided for HE to expand or contract its own provision by
displacing risk onto further-higher education was another aspect of this
interdependent but unequal relationship between the two sectors. The power of HE
providers to award their own degrees, something further-higher education did not
posses, and the ability to determine in a relatively unregulated way how much to
charge a further-higher education provider for the services an HE provider offered
in a franchise arrangement meant that further-higher education also a dependent
rather than an equal partner. Some of these dependencies and transactional
asymmetries are illustrated below.
Franchising, some economist argue, is a hybrid mode of coordination that mixes
elements of markets with hierarchy (Menard, 2004). In further-higher education it
was the category used to describe the organisational form that was typically used
as a mechanism for expanding HE numbers in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s. 
296
This took place largely through sub-contracting and offering spare student
numbers to further-higher providers at a time of rapid expansion of student
numbers between 1988 and 1994 and during a concerted shift towards
marketisation and massification in HE.
Delivering part of this expanded provision through further-higher education meant
that among other things there was no extra cost for the HE partner in building any
new facilities and that HE could be delivered via an further-higher education
partner on the latter’s own premises. This gave HE access to local markets of often
non tradition local students who were typically tied to the area for domestic
reasons or work commitments or whom were more familiar with the ethos and
environment of an FEC through prior experience and preference.
But franchising was a somewhat experimental form of economic coordination in the
context and circumstances of expanding HE in English further-higher education,
too. Incorporating it into further-higher provision as a means of achieving a drive to
widen participation and access to HE was in itself a discovery process. This was
largely because as the term is used in the policy literature it is conceptually
ambiguous and actually refers to a range of organisational forms and institutional
arrangements that were analytically quite different.
Yet an investigation of any analysis of private business franchising in the economic
and business literature would reveal that there may well be some currency in
comparing private sector franchising with the inter-organisational collaborations
that were typical of this phase of ‘low policy’. This is because private sector 
297
franchising is a hybrid in which organisational autonomy and independence coexist
with plural authority and control structures and an uneasy mix of organisational
autonomy and dependence. This inevitably poses problems for coordinating,
managing and steering franchise systems at the meso and macro level of the
organisational field and institutional environment. These problems are part of the
‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education where the coordination of multiple
interests, different values, disciplinary and organisational cultures, institutional
logics and complex causal links has to be navigated.
Moreover, as already mentioned as an adaptive and ‘clumsy institution’ it also
spreads the risk of delivery among more than one provider while combining the
resources of collaborating organisations for a common purpose. At a time of ‘low
policy’, when the institutional environment of HE and further-higher education was
turbulent and sometimes unstable, this helped smooth out the degree of
uncertainty providers operated under. What is more, and following the rapid
expansion of HE numbers mentioned in previous chapters when a cap was placed
on more expansion of these student numbers because of funding constraints in
1994, franchising acted as a buffer between the core HE delivered in the university
sector of HE and the more peripheral further-higher education sector that is the
focus of this thesis.
This era of the ‘franchise experiment’ was an ad hoc response to the policy shifts
and high levels of environmental uncertainty and turbulence that some would
argue was a consequence of a lack of a clear policy steer. Franchising was also an
integral component of the general trend towards the marketisation of HE and 
298
further-higher education after incorporation because it was one of the first attempts
to release both FE and HE providers from the control of local authorities and to let
loose the market and competitive mechanisms as a mechanism for expanding
participation rates. This created both opportunities and problems in regulation
during this phase of ‘low policy’.
In this section the ‘franchise experiment’ as a hybrid organisational form is
illustrated. Its role in widening participation to HE for non traditional students is
outlined and its position in the ecology of further-higher education provision
highlighted and used as a way of demonstrating the analytical purchase of the
conceptual framework developed in part Two.
The contribution of franchising to understanding the political economy of furtherhigher
education lies in the lessons it can provide for understanding the tensions
between organisational control and autonomy and the institutional contradictions
that can result from a condition of institutional duality on hybrid organisations that
are a mix of both FE and HE. Private sector business franchising operates under
conditions in which dual authority and control structures coincide in one
organisational form and as such shows similarities to the conditions under which
further-higher education is delivered.
Similar circumstances exist in further-higher education where the institutional
environment and institutional arrangements found there result in the generation of
plural control and authority structures. Understanding the dynamics of the
boundary work that takes place in these inter-organisational collaborations is 
299
important for managing the potential tensions that result and the strategies of
further-higher providers who may strategically shift from one set of institutional
logics to another according to situation or circumstance. Positioning strategies
within an organisational field need to be contextualised against this framework of
institutional duality and the distinct identities of further-higher providers who are
neither FE nor HE but a hybrid of both.
Franchising also demonstrates similarities to other organisational forms such as
strategic alliances, joint ventures, consortiums and partnerships and other hybrids
that constitute inter-organisational collaborations that are premised upon a bilateral
dependency and moderate to high degrees of asset specificity that lock them into a
relations of mutual dependency. Again this is a key characteristic of the
organisational forms found in further-higher education across the last twenty years.
Asset specificity and bilateral dependency figure prominently in the makeup of both
‘low policy’ and ‘high policy’. What has changed is the degree and intensity with
which the central state has intervened to steer further-higher education. The
following chapter explores the transitions that took place during ‘high policy’.
There is inevitably a tension between autonomy and dependence in such
collaborative arrangements although these will inevitably shift and evolve over the
life cycle of the franchise. The transition from ‘low policy’ to ‘high policy’ was just
such a shift as further-higher education moved from an institutional environment
premised on marketisation to one based on semi-compulsory forms of structured
collaboration. 
300
In part Two the exchanges taking place at the further-higher interface were
conceptualised through the application of a modified version of transaction cost
economic theory that recognised the relational and contextual embeddedness of
transactions in configurations of pre-existing social relations. In combination with
other theoretical contributions that explored the nature of boundary work and the
role and function of boundary organisations in mediating exchanges at the furtherhigher
interface, an analytical framework was developed that emphasised the
importance of asset specificity for inter-organisational and inter-sector
collaboration.
Asset specificity is in reality a form of relational embeddedness. Contrary to the
model of asset specificity first developed by Williamson (1985) and transaction cost
theory the analytical model used here incorporates asset specificity into a relational
and contextually embedded institutional context that is conceptualised holistically
in terms of a wider political economy. The insights of economic sociologists,
organisational theorists and sociologists of science and technology were drawn
upon to investigate this aspect of the institutionalisation of exchanges at the
further-higher interface. Their studies of, boundary work, boundary organisations
and the use of boundary objects in other policy domains are arguably transferable
to the separate FE and HE domains.
Indeed asset specificity is by definition a structural relationship that can make no
sense except as a relationship between two independent autonomous but
bilaterally dependent organisations. Contextualising asset specificity during the
phase of ‘low policy’ through the example of franchising, therefore, involves the 
301
incorporation of a political economy of further-higher education that can
encapsulate the dynamics of power and asset and resource deployment
historically as well as in contemporary terms. The socio-political and cultural
context in which exchanges take place are intrinsic to understanding exchanges
and boundary work at the further-higher interface. The embeddedness of
exchanges in institutional environments and organisations fields and practices
needs to be factored in to any analysis. Critics of transaction cost economics argue
that insufficient attention is paid to the embeddedness of the economic in the
social.
The institutional and contextual embeddedness of further-higher education is a
consequence of the continued influence of sector legacies and identities and the
extent to which the FE and HE institutional environments that were established by
the Further and Higher Education Act of 1992 are congruent or display institutional
distance. The different ‘rules of the game’ that operate in the FE and HE sectors
have in the past created problems for further-higher provision. The additional
workload that is the consequence of operating two systems was time consuming
and could lead to duplication. This was certainly the case during ‘low policy’ during
which parallel systems operated.
During the ‘franchise experiment’ while the delivery of HE was sub-contracted to
further-higher providers by HE partners, it was the HE partner that was
accountable and had responsibility for quality assurance. The different cultures and
modus operandi of organisations involved in this type of franchising were as often
as not barriers to smooth operation. While this was inevitable to a degree the 
302
boundary work that took place at the interface was rarely integrated into the
systems of both partners in systematic or coordinated manner. Much good practice
relied on individuals or boundary spanners.
Prior to incorporation franchising as a mode of coordination existed mainly as a
relation between the old polytechnic sector and FECs. These were both under the
oversight of the local authorities at the time and were essentially situated in the
municipal or public sector of HE. Asset specificity was therefore largely determined
by the local state who controlled funding and which mediated the central state to
plan, fund and quality assure further-higher education provision.
With incorporation these assets were transferred to the newly incorporated FE and
HE sectors whose formal status was reaffirmed with the Further and Higher
Education Act of 1992 as two separate sectors. FE and HE were classified as
different categories and the further-higher interface was a largely unregulated zone
that sat between these two sectors. Further-higher education was somewhat
anomalous in this new configuration and example of ‘matter out of place’.
In terms of asset specificity the deployment of resources across sector and interorganisational
boundaries did not change overnight. What did change was a shift
in the ‘rules of the game’ and the degree of autonomy that providers now had to
plan their alliances. Both FE and HE providers took advantage of new found
freedom to establish a diverse range of collaborative arrangements the most
common of which was generally described as franchising. 
303
The institutional arrangements or governance structures that existed under ‘low
policy’ witnessed the FEFC overseeing FE and the HEFCE and HEQC overseeing
HE. Occasionally they worked together but this was not systematic or sustained
during this phase of ‘low policy’. Funding, planning and quality assurance functions
were to all extents and purposes the property of two structural distinct sectors.
Further-higher education sat somewhat anomalously in between, an ambiguous
liminal zone betwixt and between.
Further-higher education was a sub-ordinate part of a larger system of higher
education provision rooted in the old polytechnics and traditional university subsectors.
Its role and function within an evolving organisational field still remained
marginal and peripheral both in terms of policy engagement and practice. The
relationship of further-higher education to the ‘new universities’ and the traditional
universities would remain a functional one. This was because while further-higher
education provided a number of advantages to HE providers as a source of
flexibility during a volatile era of ‘low policy’ or no policy’ the residues of that
relationship remained intact under ‘high policy’.
Turing to asset specificity and the analytical model developed in part Two, the
asset specificity of these bilaterally dependent arrangements were typical
characteristics of the organisational forms found during the ‘franchise experiment’.
The key dimensions of asset specificity during the ‘franchise experiment’ related to
the dimensions of brand name capital, site asset specificity and human asset
specificity. Table 10.0 summarises the six dimensions of asset specificity as 
304
initially identified in chapter Seven and then applies them to the period of ‘low
policy’.
Asset Specificity
Human Asset Specificity
Qualifications, staff development, ethos/pedagogic style.
Site Asset Specificity
Linked to location and ease of access. Psychological and cultural distance
between Further-Higher and HE provision
Brand Name Capital
Power to validate awards. Reputation and status of brand. Franchising
expands and regulated through HE partner
Dedicated Asset Specificity
Resources invested single partnership rather than multiple partnerships.
Physical Asset Specificity
Pre-existed set up of collaboration. Buildings or specialist equipment or
infrastructural expertise.
Temporal Asset Specificity
Transfer function of Further-Higher Education as contrasted to Further-Higher
education as a terminal qualification.
 Table 10.0
The main shifts in terms of asset specificity during ‘low policy’ were reflected in the
dominance of franchising as an organisational form. Given the caveats mentioned
earlier in the chapter ‘franchising’ was a term that was often used ambiguously,
flexibly and sometimes technically inaccurately. Nevertheless, it was a mode of
organising that was distinct from the deployment of resources and the
characteristic forms of assets specificity that were common during the preincorporation
phase in which the municipal or public sector delivered HE. The role
and function of the local authorities was no longer prominent and there was greater
freedom for newly incorporated FE and HE providers to pursue their own strategies
in a lightly regulated and low grid institutional environment.
Thus incorporation introduced a corporate model of delivery that was divorced from
the control of the local authorities and invested resource deployment in individual 
305
and autonomous corporations that were responsible for their own human
resources, funding and physical plant. Yet these were still dominantly funded and
resourced by the central state and hence the major shift in institutional logic was
not in reality a form of privatisation but a shift in the redefinition and reclassification
of further-higher education as a more business-like model of delivery that was
premised upon shifting organisational incentives.
Assets were certainly redeployed within further-higher education but they were still
invested with a public interest that meant that the role of the central state would
remain dominant. The asset specificity and bilateral dependency of the hybrid
organisational forms found in the emerging organisational field and loosely termed
franchising shifted in degree but not substantially in kind.
Franchising was basically about the sub-contracting of a brand through indirect
funding that placed the HE partner in a dominant position. Brand name capital as
an example of asset specificity was reconfigured during ‘low policy’ not in
substance but in its operational delivery under newly incorporated FE and HE
partner organisation. The HE brand was what FECs sought and for HE they sought
access to local markets and a ready source of future students.
Nor was site asset specificity, dedicated asset specificity or physical asset
specificity radically different from the pre-incorporation phase of further-higher
education maturation apart from the transfer of physical assets from the local
authority to the now incorporated and autonomous FE and HE bodies. What was
different was that human asset specificity was being fundamentally reconfigured 
306
because the terms and conditions under which further-higher education staff
worked were considerably inferior to those of their HE partners and that the
screening of qualifications and experience of FE staff delivering HE was
unsystematic and ad hoc. Indeed there were no systems in place to ensure that
staff delivering further-higher education had the necessary skills or experience to
deliver further-higher education. Arguably further-higher education was a cheaper
way of expanding HE and one which would provoke less resistance in trying to
implement new models of learning and student support which were more common
in FE than in traditional HE.
Although the distinct ethos, pedagogies and more intimate scale of further-higher
education delivery were recognised as major advantages in further-higher
education playing a more prominent role in targeting non traditional students and to
aiding widening participation and access there was nevertheless less confidence
that all staff in further-higher education were suitably qualified. To put it bluntly the
cart was being put in front of the horse.
Asset specificity in further-higher education during ‘low policy was about the
redeployment of existing resources in new configurations and constrained by
resource constraints and cuts consistent with a move to NPM, the reduction or
hollowing out of the role of the state as outlined in the previous chapter.
This was an era in which there was a high degree of uncertainty for further-higher
providers under a low grid institutional environment. Funding agreements based on
franchising were largely unregulated and would vary considerably with some 
307
complaints of top slicing by some FE partners. It was official policy to encourage
the operation of the market and marketisation (HEFCE, 1995, 1996) while the stop
go policy of expansion followed by a capping of HE numbers in 1994 led to some
HE partners withdrawing from franchising at short notice. Funding cycles were
annual and the costing of further-higher education was under developed. It would
not be until the shift to ‘high policy’ that concerted efforts would be made to
investigate the actual costs of delivering further-higher education.
The frequency dimension of transaction cost economics relates to how often a
transaction takes place and its duration. Under ‘low policy’ the archetypical model
of franchising was at an early stage of development in its life cycle. Instances of
short termism and opportunism could take place as a result of the uncertainty of
funding and the stop-go policies of government in expanding and then capping HE
numbers from 1994 as outlined earlier.
Where franchised arrangements were longer standing reputational mechanisms
and the development of inter-organisational trust that moved beyond trust in
individuals may have evolved. The complexities of collaboration and the
transaction costs of initially setting up and maintaining inter-organisational
franchising were high. Returns would be long term rather than immediate although
that did not preclude short termism during this period of ‘low policy’ and bricolage.
The lack of a clear policy steer or of systematic strategic planning of interorganisational
collaborations meant that further-higher education could be a
volatile mix at this stage of its development. 
308
There was no control over the number of partners a franchisee or franchisor might
have at this stage and some concerns would be expressed about the capacity of
further-higher education to deal with multiple partners. Dearing would later raise
this issue. However, for further-higher education the ability to switch partners was
a source of bargaining strength when few other opportunities were available.
Asset Specificity and the ‘Franchise Experiment’
Taken together these dimension of asset specificity, uncertainty, frequency and
small numbers bargaining give an insight into the approach of transaction cost
economics as outlined in chapters Four and Six. The behavioural assumption of
transaction cost economics, which assumes that opportunism and ‘self seeking
with guile’ need to be controlled through appropriate monitoring mechanisms,
would arguably fit this era of ‘low policy’ during which there were isolated incidents
of opportunistic behaviour. In particular, the sudden withdrawal from franchising
agreements by an HE partner as their operating environment tightened was
witnessed on more than one occasion. Under a weakly regulated and low grid
institutional environment the institutional arrangements that were put in place
immediately after incorporation arguably lacked sufficiently mature checks and
balances such as those that had evolved over time in the pre incorporated world of
public HE. It would take time for them to do so, as new ‘rules of the game’ would
become embedded in practice during the transition to ‘high policy’. 
309
The ‘Franchise Experiment’ as a Discovery Process
The role and function of franchising at the further-higher interface in this period of
‘low policy’ and the ‘franchise experiment’ was a discovery process because the
turbulence of the further-higher institutional environment, the environmental
uncertainty that franchising was routinely subject to and the institutional duality of
further-higher education inevitably created tensions that were not easily resolvable.
The different traditions, institutional logics, sector legacies, cultures and distinct
modus operandi of HE and FE partners collaborating through franchising
complicated this situation further. Adapting to these pressures was a learning
process and one that could rely neither on adopting a pure FE nor a pure HE
model as a means of dealing with the situation.
The insights drawn from an analysis of franchising for understanding the political
economy of further-higher education are fundamentally linked to an understanding
of the interdependency of the relation of franchisor to franchisee as an
asymmetrical relation based on differences in power and influence. Here it should
be noted that further-higher education as a hybrid organisational form is a natural
laboratory for exploring the consequences of such institutional duality and
asymmetrical relations and that the operation of dual authority and control
structures in its organisational field must be contextualised accordingly.
Even if franchising was a predominant feature of the years following the
incorporation of the FE sector as it witnessed a dramatic growth in the sub
contracting of HE provision to further-higher education providers (Abramson, 1994, 
310
Abramson et al, 1993, 1996, Bocock and Scott, 1995, Rawlinson et al, 1996) it did
not die out with the shift to ‘high policy’. This next phase of the maturation of the
further-higher organisational field will be dealt with in the following chapter.
However, the franchise experiment is significant because it marked a learning
process and discovery process whereby the advantages and disadvantages of a
largely unregulated type of inter-organisational collaboration emerged through
experience, bricolage and trial and error.
The business franchise literature demonstrates that a number of tensions and
paradoxes exist within franchises that usually involve the amount of franchiser
control and franchisee autonomy, pressures towards standardisation as against
diversification and incentives to innovate against pressures towards conformity.
Similar tensions existed in further-higher education during the ‘franchise
experiment’. These are consistent with the contradictory nature of some of the
reforms associated with NPM elsewhere. The tension between centralisation and
delegation for example is one. The degree of organisational autonomy and control
that exists in inter-organisational relations that are contractual in form but
negotiated daily in practice is another. Furthermore the institutional duality of
further-higher education creates other pressures.
The separate funding, planning and quality assurance systems operating during
‘low policy’ generated their own transaction costs including increased duplication,
investment in learning and operating different systems of inspection and peer 
311
review and insufficient attention to the role and function of further-higher education
as a core part of a mass system of higher education provision.
Other tensions between competition and collaboration coexisted. While the
dominant rhetoric was marketisation, in effect what existed in further-higher
education were quasi-markets and the asset specificity and bilateral dependency
of all further-higher education ensured that collaboration in some form or another
was essential. Dealing with these tensions, contradictions and paradoxes was a
discovery process.
On the other hand there were clearly synergies that resulted from franchising. At
the point of delivery it is the localised knowledge, ease of accessibility for local and
non traditional students and familiar ethos of the further-higher education provider
that is valued by students. This is also ultimately the case with the HE providers,
because collaborative delivery allows it to reach hitherto untapped markets or to
mount a presence in a locality in which it previously had none. It is in this context
that the hybrid organisations providing collaborative delivery can be said to be
engaged in a discovery process.
It has also resulted in the success of collaborative delivery in widening participation
to non-traditional and under-represented groups in HE. Moreover, the increased
diversification of post-16 institutions’ delivery models and organisational forms has
been adjudged successful by the funding body (HEFCE, 1995). As predicted in the
literature, franchising can be a mechanism for accessing marginal, experimental or 
312
highly localised markets in which, prior to the franchise arrangement, the franchiser
was not represented.
It could also be claimed that it is at the interstices of the FE and HE sectors that
innovation is likely to occur. This is because the constraints and sanctions which
are embedded in the internal bureaucratic structures of individual organisations
and which are prone towards conformity and standardisation do not exist to the
same degree across sector boundaries. Job descriptions are less clear and more
fluid leaving more scope for experimentation, the operating environment is less
familiar and changes quickly thus requiring flexible responses and mechanisms of
control and co-ordination less hierarchical.
The seeking out of new markets or experimentation with new forms of provision to
gauge its effectiveness or potential for success may be first explored through
franchising. This is equally true of post-16 collaborative arrangements where the
delivery of HE in FE has grown considerably to become a significant form of HE
provision with many HEI providers investing heavily it.
As a discovery process, the use of collaborative working during the ‘franchise
experiment became a laboratory for understanding the strengths and weaknesses
of delivery through bilaterally dependent inter-organisational relations. The
franchise experiment has involved a rapid learning curve and the generation of
solutions and new ways of hybrid organisational working illustrated some of the
faults and weaknesses that result from to little regulation of a complex
organisational field and interdependent system of further-higher education and HE. 
313
Franchising: Lessons for Further-Higher Education
The section draws upon the literature dealing with private business format
franchising in order to suggest insights into the dynamics and operation of
collaboration in further-higher education. It sketches an overview of the similarities
and differences between private sector franchising and similar inter-organisational
collaborative relations and between distinct types of FE and HE. It then uses
illustrations of franchising drawn from the phase of ‘low policy’ to demonstrate the
analytic significance of the conceptual frameworks developed in part two for
understanding the dynamics of further-higher education. It also draws upon
collaborative audits by the HEQC, the QAA which replaced it and the HEFCE for
understanding franchising during this phase of ‘low policy’ and the role of these
audits as boundary objects functioning to mediate, translate and construct a
common meaning system in further-higher education that crosses the FE and HE
divide.
The extent to which the business franchising concept reflects the complexities and
tensions of the collaborative inter-organisational arrangements found in furtherhigher
education will be addressed below. The relevance of the parallels,
similarities and differences will be judged through illustrations from policy
documents and other educational sources that deal with further-higher education
provision prior to 1997. Table 10.1 outlines some of the more significant of these
shifts. Table 10.2 identifies a limited number of boundary objects that could be 
314
used to cross the inter-organisational boundaries and sector legacies of furtherhigher
education providers.
The institutional environment, institutional arrangements and organisational fields
are presented as linked iteration across the macro and meso level and the
mediums through which the ‘rules of the game’ are applied in play in the
organisational field. The boundary organisations that straddle the further-higher
education interface and the boundary objects they produce and the boundary work
that takes place in further-higher education are presented as iterations of meso
and micro level process. In combination they track the main institutional and
organisational transitions and shifts that took place during the phase of ‘low policy’
and the ‘franchise experiment’ in further-higher education.
The ‘franchise experiment’ was very much an ad hoc process of learning through
doing, a discovery process in further-higher education that responded to the highly
turbulent, sometimes unstable and uncertain economic environments generated by
short term policy changes, initiatives and funding constraints at the further-higher
education interface during ‘low policy’. Boundary objects that provided some
degree of stability and commonality, across the sector interface and that could be
used to cross sector and inter-organisational boundaries were relatively few and
far between. Occasionally the FEFC and HEFCE/HEQC worked together but
further-higher education was not considered a priority for them.
Shifts in the institutional environment, the institutional arrangements or governance
structures overseeing the configuration of transactions and exchanges at the 
315
further-higher interface during this phase and changes in the role and functions of
boundary organisations and boundary objects during the transition to ‘high policy’
(outlined in more depth in the next chapter) are shown in table 10.2.
Institutional environment (‘rules of the game’)
MACRO
Education Act 1988
Further and Higher Education Act 1992
Abolition of binary divide
Institutional arrangements (governance structures)
MACRO TO MESO LINKAGES
CNAA established 1988
HEFCE,FEFC, HEQC established 1992
Organisational field
MESO
Further-Higher Education marginal and peripheral
Largely invisible in policy terms
‘Low policy’ and marketisation
Field life cycle: immature
HE advocacy dominates policy making for Further-Higher
Education
Boundary Work
(boundary organisations/boundary objects)
MESO – MICRO LINKAGES
Role and function of boundary organisations ambiguous
• HEFCE
• FEFC
• HEQC
Boundary objects: a few collaborative audits produced
• HEFCE 1995/6
• HEQC 1995/6
Boundary work and through franchising ad hoc/Bricolage
Organisational Forms-Hybrids
MICRO
Internalising duality
* Franchising
* FE model dominates
* FE and HE systems largely run in parallel
Table 10.1 
316
Boundary Objects ‘LOW POLICY’
1988 to 1996
‘HIGH POLICY’
1997 to 2008
Codes of practice No 1998/199, 2000, 2010 in press
Web sites
Boundary orgs
HEFCE
HEQC
HEFCE
QAA from 1997
HE Academy
LLLN’s
Policy docs
Consultations
Circulars
HEFCE (1995, 1996) HEFCE 2006, HEFCE, 2008,
ILO’s , subject
benchmark statements
Programme
specifications
No HEQF
Consultations/Events Relatively infrequent More frequent (increased
information load). HEFCE
2006/2008
Collaborative Audits HEFCE 1995, HEQC,
1993, 1995
HEFCE, 2009
Table 10.2
Boundary Work, Boundary Organisations and Boundary Objects
The boundary organisations that mediated the further-higher interface were
relatively undeveloped and their roles and functions were unclear and ambiguous.
As mentioned earlier neither the HEFCE nor the HEQC on the HE side or the
FEFC on the FE side saw further-higher education as its main area of
responsibility. The consequence was that further-higher education occupied a
liminal and interstitial zone that was not clearly demarcated or defined in terms of
their roles and responsibilities for regulating further-higher education.
A few collaborative audits and preliminary investigations of the scale and scope of
further-higher education had commenced following incorporation constituting
incipient boundary objects but they were relatively rare. These are dealt with in
more detail below. In reality not only was there a limited evidence base and
understanding of further-higher education but there was little strategic planning
with bricolage and reactive and ad hoc policy making in retrospect. 
317
‘Low Policy’ and the Evidence Base
In further-higher education early exploration into quality assurance of collaborative
provision consisted of a number of collaborative audits, occasional interim reports
that were largely focused on franchising as the dominant mode of provision during
this period of ‘low policy’.
Interim reports on collaborative delivery by the old HEQC (1993, 1995, 1995a)
suggested that auditing collaborative institutions and quality assurance
mechanisms were evolving methodologies rather than well tried and tested
methods (HEQC, 1995, p18). In effect these audits were part of a discovery
process whereby the newly formed FEFC and HEFCE would build their knowledge
base and understanding of the dynamics of further-higher education albeit slowly
and gradually.
The lessons, which were learnt from these reports, however, involved a number of
recommendations concerning areas for improvement and identified some
concerns. Some of the discoveries made indicated that the first phase of the
‘franchise experiment’ was characteristically unplanned and frantic and the
evidence available on the scale and scope of franchising and its effectiveness was
limited. This was a phase of bricolage and making do with whatever was at hand.
Although these provisional findings need to be treated with caution due to the
reliance by early reports on a limited evidence base some significant issues did 
318
begin to emerge. These include the suggestion that early experiments in
franchising were often under regulated with the occasional example of
opportunistic behaviour taking place between FE and HE organisations.
Indeed it is doubtful that further-higher education providers or those who oversaw
their regulation had the range of experience of franchising as an organisational
form in further-higher education that was general in private sector business
franchising were it was longer standing and more developed. Management in both
FE and HE sectors and their regulators in were on rapid learning curves in
establishing their knowledge of two sectors that were formally distinct and with
anomalies and ambiguous roles and responsibilities in areas of further-higher
education such as the provision of higher nationals where funding was via the
FEFC until it was transferred to the HEFCE post Dearing.
The lessons of this phase of the ‘franchise experiment’ included the dangers of
exacerbating the potential for opportunism among franchisers and franchisees in a
relatively lightly regulated environment in which the grid dimension of the gridgroup
heuristic was relatively weak. Yearly funding cycles and stop go policies on
expanding or consolidating student numbers in HE from 1994 when numbers were
capped thereby transmitting different messages as FE was extolled to go for all out
growth while HE was reigned in did not bode well for stability. Another lesson was
perhaps more a function of public perceptions of franchising and the need to
ensure quality through regulation at a time when the prime responsibilities for
quality lay with the HE partner. These arrangements were found to be variable. 
319
Issues of monitoring and quality assurance of further-higher education would have
to be balanced against institutional autonomy to guard the public interest. Other
lessons learnt were that the control, co-ordination and disposition of plural authority
structures, both formal and informal created their own tensions at interorganisational
boundaries and the further-higher interface. Boundary workers and
boundary organisations would therefore would probably have to play a more
proactive and directive role than they did during the phase of ‘low policy’.
The insights of the business franchise literature, collaborative policy audits and
related ‘grey’ and practitioner literature identified in earlier offer a starting point for
the construction of a provisional analytical model which attempted to classify and
explain the salient characteristics of recently emergent hybrid organisational forms
in further-higher education including franchising. These were outlined in part One
and part Two of the thesis.
Hybrid organisational forms posed novel problems for the control, co-ordination
and legitimation of further-higher education. In further-higher education the distinct
organisational cultures and structures, different terms of employment contract,
institutional logics and relations to external validating and awarding bodies
complicated things further. In reality dual accountability streams, control structures
and authority structures co-existed within further-higher education at this phase of
its development. It was probable that there would be tensions and paradoxes
generated within and between franchisers and franchisees because of the
structural ambiguity of hybrids with feet in both the FE and HE camps. 
320
Central to these tensions are the disposition of power and authority at the furtherhigher
interface, the extent of centralisation versus decentralisation providers are
subject to and the tensions between the amounts of organisational autonomy and
control they posses in what are in reality bilaterally dependent relations between
further-higher education and HE. This balance of power would be likely to shift as
partnerships mature and enter different stages in the life cycle and maturation of
their organisational field.
This section has highlighted the structurally ambiguous position of franchisees
within further-higher education, the tensions that can be generated as a result and
the impact of these tensions on the authority structures and mechanisms of coordination
and control found at the further-higher interface. It suggests that an
understanding of these dynamics can be best approached through a life cycle
model of franchising through which plural authority structures and the mix of formal
and informal authority can be explored over time.
The use of a theoretical case study as adopted in this thesis is useful in exploring
these stages of the development of the organisational field during this stage of ‘low
policy’. It allows the exploration of the iteration of context and process at the
further-higher interface against a wider political economy and context. At a time of
turbulent and rapid institutional and organisational change in further-higher
education and under an institutional environment and set of institutional
arrangements that characterised the era of ‘low policy’ the case study method
illustrates the iteration of process and context during a time of uncertainty,
bricolage and making do. 
321
This chapter has tried to apply some of the insights of part Two on the theoretical
basis of the franchise experiment to transitional events that took place at the
further-higher interface during the phase of ‘low policy’. This era was very much a
discovery process and one in which bricolage and relatively ad hoc and reactive
systems of regulating franchising evolved through trial and error.
The next chapter illustrates a fundamental shift in the ‘rules of the game’ and
change in institutional logic as shift away from competition to structured
collaboration developed. This phase of ‘high policy’ was predated by the Dearing
Report of 1997 which marks a significant watershed in the development of English
further-higher education. 
322
CHAPTER ELEVEN
‘HIGH POLICY’
This chapter will outline changes in the institutional environment and organisational
landscape of further-higher education during the transition from the period of ‘low
policy’ to ‘high policy’. It applies the analytical framework and concepts developed
in part Two to understanding the process of policy formation and implementation in
further-higher education following the publication of the Dearing report in 1997.
During this phase of ‘high policy’, and especially after the confirmation of the
special mission of further-higher education to provide intermediary or sub degree
level HE provision was signalled by a government white paper in 2003, the furtherhigher
education organisational field had reached a stage of relative maturity in
comparison to the proceeding era of ‘low policy’. In contrast to the ad hoc bricolage
of policy formation during the earlier stage of ‘low policy’ a more strategic approach
to policy formation in further-higher education was more evident.
The era of ‘high policy’ was a phase of development in further-higher education
that saw its maturation as an organisational field. Significant events during this era
of ‘high policy’ provide illustrations of stages of development in the structuration of
its field. 
323
According to DiMaggio and Powell (1983) as an organisational field matures and
becomes increasingly distinct it will exhibit: an increase in interaction among
organisations in its field; the development of inter-organizational structures of
control; an increase in the amount of information circulating; and the emergence of
mutual awareness of the existence of organisations. To the extent that this occurs
then the field becomes increasingly more structured and the process of
institutionalisation is embedded in practice through recurrent and routine
interaction.
The era of ‘high policy’ witnessed an increasingly collaborative policy steer that
saw an increase in the volume of boundary objects produced in further-higher
education, for instance codes of practice and advice on quality assurance matters.
These can readily be identified through a perusal of the web sites of relavant
funding and quality assurance boundary organisations such as the HEFCE and
QAA. In contrast to the ‘phase of ‘low policy’ an interventionist approach was
evident during the shift to ‘high policy’ that encouraged collaboration across the FE
and HE sectors. To some extent this ameliorated the institutional pressures of a
market led pre-Dearing phase. However, one constant feature of the transition in
further-higher education was the tension between an institutional environment that
encouraged competition and one that emphasised collaboration.
The potential to develop a common identity and meaning system shared by
organisations at the further-higher interface that was distinct from FE and also
from HE was encouraged by the establishment of a special mission for further-
324
higher providers to deliver foundation degrees and intermediary short cycle HE
qualifications from 2001 onwards. However, this phase of development needs to
be tempered with an awareness that further-higher education was not perceived by
all as a legitimate mode of higher education (Parry et al, 2008) and its legitimacy
could not be taken for granted.
Finally in terms of a wider political economy further-higher education is a
subordinate sub-component of a larger HE organisational field. Disparities in
resources, status and reputation and funding between universities and furtherhigher
providers ensure that exchanges at the further-higher interface are
asymmetrical and unequal. Within the context of its organisational field, and
drawing on the Bourdieu’s original concept of field, inter-organisational interaction
is a contest over resource acquisition and legitimacy.
A further complication is the result of the institutional duality of further-higher
education. Within the further-higher organisational field there is more than one
institutional logic at work, one rooted in FE and another in HE. Sometimes these
logics co-exist beside one another almost as parallel system. This was typical of
the era of ‘low policy’ for the most part. On other occasions they contest for
resources and legitimacy. In other cases a process of hybridisation is the outcome
with hybrid further-higher education organisations evolving as hybrid organisational
forms that adapt to the institutional contradictions that emerge from institutional
duality. Prominent among these institutional contradictions has been the tension
between competition and collaboration that has been a feature of the two decades 
325
following incorporation. Under ‘high policy’ the shift to collaboration marked a sea
change in terms of the engagement of policy makers with further-higher education.
The neo-institutionalist analytical framework adopted during this research
contextualised these shifts in the broad contours of the further-higher education
landscape. The boundary work taking place at the further-higher interface
mediates the complexities, tensions and synergies that emerge within furtherhigher
delivery. The role and function of boundary organisations in mediating the
planning and regulatory framework of further-higher education has been
conceptualised relationally and holistically. Boundary organisations functioned to
produce boundary objects as mechanisms for facilitating inter-sector and interorganisational
collaboration. It is the process whereby boundary objects have
become embedded as practice (or alternatively have not) during the phase of ‘high
policy’ that is explored in this chapter. One question behind the implementation of
boundary objects as embedded practice is what constitutes an effective or noneffective
boundary object. While this is not explored in great depth here it is an
area that could usefully be looked at in the future.
Thus the shift to structured collaboration at the further-higher education interface
during this phase of ‘high policy’ was mediated through boundary organisations
that were given a clearer remit to facilitate cross-sector working. In contrast to the
remit given to those that were in existence during the phase of ‘low policy’, they
had less ambiguous roles as mediators of the divergent interests across the
further-higher interface. Funding for prescribed HE, although not non-prescribed
which remained under the oversight of the FE sector, irrespective of where it was 
326
delivered was given over to HE sector bodies. Quality assurance mechanisms that
had originated in the HE sector were increasingly adapted to accommodate the
special circumstances of further-higher providers. In contrast to the institutional
environment that operated during ‘low policy’ the planning, funding and quality
assurance systems in operation were more integrated. However, while the
boundaries between sectors and FE and HE organisations blurred somewhat they
nevertheless remained entrenched. Sector legacies and identities retained a
significant influence in the day to day delivery of further-higher education.
It was through boundary work that boundary organisations across the FE and HE
divide functioned to align and coordinate the multiple interests, disparate values,
institutional logics and organisational cultures of FE and HE. The permeability or
rigidity of sector and organisational boundaries cannot be understood in terms of
static dualities. They were the consequence of a constant process of negotiation at
the further-higher interface. Given the policy shifts and a renewed emphasis on
structured collaboration across sector boundaries, boundary organisations played
a central role in facilitating communication. Theorising and conceptualising these
functions as boundary work at the further-higher interface can throw light on policy
implementation. In particular, the effectiveness of boundary objects as mediators of
collaboration and mechanisms of policy implementation can be investigated.
The legacies, tensions and different institutional logics that typifying the furtherhigher
interface contributed to the ‘wicked problem’ of how to address equity
issues in an increasingly diverse and stratified system of higher education
delivery. As further-higher education provision increased in its complexity and 
327
structural diversity, a system had evolved that needed a strong central steer. This
policy steer was mediated by those boundary organisations that sat at the furtherhigher
interface. During ‘high policy’ their role and function as mediators between
the diverse organisational structures, cultures and practices in FE and HE at the
further-higher interface increased in significance and importance.
The divergent institutional pressures that operated within the further-higher
organisational field as a consequence of the institutional duality of further-higher
education somewhat contradicted the claims of the original neo-institutionalist
model of institutional isomorphism. The claim that as an organisational field
matured its component organisations would become more alike as they were
subject to similar institutional pressures in the field and would produce similar
organisational forms as it matured can be challenged. On the contrary the
institutional duality of further-higher education appeared to be contributing to the
evolution of an even more highly diverse and differentiated system of provision
notable for its complexity.
Moreover, a process of hybridisation in further-higher education was taking place
as further-higher providers internalised the external institutional duality of the
environment. The institutional contradictions that were a product of the duality and
separate institutional logics of further-higher education co-existed within the same
organisational field. Consequently, distinct processes of institutional isomorphism
operated co-jointly within the organisational field but almost as insulated enclaves
within segments of the organisational field. At the same time structural
differentiation increased. 
328
Further-higher organisational forms needed to be adaptable enough to cope with
these institutional tensions. Institutional duality in further-higher education
produced both isomorphic pressures, especially through the reconfiguration of
funding and quality mechanisms, but also divergence through the variation of a
limited number of modes of organising in further-higher education in different
combinations and permutations. For example consortia conform to similar funding
and quality pressures as a collective entity in providing further-higher education but
retain their own distinct identities as distinct examples of distinct organisational
forms. Conceptualising institutional duality in further-higher education has to
accommodate both convergent and divergent institutional forces. It is argued that
one response is the evolution of hybrid organisational forms that are adaptable and
flexible enough to cope with these tensions.
During the transition to the phase of ‘high policy’, the further-higher interface was
reconfigured, re-categorised and reclassified with the funding of all prescribed HE
moving to the HE sector. The transfer of some of the functions previously under
the remit of the FEFC to the HEFCE was implemented by 1999. The establishment
of the QAA in 1997 to oversee quality in all prescribed HE excluded non-prescribed
provision of HE which remained somewhat of an anomaly in the classification
system of HE. Non-prescribed HE remained under the remit of FEFC and later
OFSTED and the LSC.
It was during the interim between 1997 and the publication of the white paper in
2003 that new responsibilities for overseeing further-higher education created 
329
challenges for all concerned. For the HEFCE and QAA, increased numbers of
further-higher providers now came under their remit increasing the complexity of
their task as a boundary organisation and new ‘rules of the game’ had to be
established as further-higher providers familiarised themselves with different
systems of quality assurance that were peer led rather than inspection based
(Underwood and Collins, 2000).
Initially, the transfer of these responsibilities for HE funding and quality assurance
irrespective of where it was delivered was somewhat of a culture shock for many
further-higher providers who were more familiar with the inspection regime of the
FEFC. This inevitably incurred transaction costs as new ‘rules of the game’ had to
be learned.
There was also some duplication of efforts in building an evidence base as
different statistical datasets for FE and HE were consulted to establish
commonalities between them. Often the different statistical datasets did not match
or were gathered according to different conventions or purposes creating problems
in establishing an evidence base. The period 1997 to 2003 marked the initial early
phase of this transition to ‘high policy’ followed by a more mature phase during
which further-higher provision was increasingly more high profile in terms of policy
formation. An update on the state of further-higher education was published in
2009 by the HEFCE and it identified 2003 as marking the point at which furtherhigher
education was becoming accepted as a niche form of HE provision
(HEFCE, 2009). 
330
The further-higher interface was substantially reconfigured once more through the
creation of the LSC under the Learning and Skills Act of 2000. This created an
extended FE sector now reclassified as the learning and skills sector. Working
through its forty seven regional arms it was encouraged to collaborate with HE. In
2001 the LSC became operational. In the same year foundation degrees were
established. These were presented as a vehicle for extending the role and
functions of further-higher education in widening participation through the creation
of a special mission for further-higher education to deliver sub degree HE. This
new qualification would be based on steered structured collaboration across the
further-higher interface and through organisational incentives designed to
encourage inter-organisational working. This included collaboration with employers
in designing vocational foundation degrees making this employer focussed steer
part of the special mission of further-higher education.
Therefore, the shift to ‘high policy’ signalled the desirability of raising the profile of
further-higher education and its role in widening participation to HE, especially in
the delivery of sub degree or intermediary levels of HE. The policy aim was to
move away from the market led competitive ethos that had marked the early
1990’s and ‘low policy’.
The Dearing Report had originally recommended that further-higher education
should be given a special mission for delivering intermediary or sub degree level
HE that was vocational in tone. What followed was a series of measures
implemented by the Labour government elected in 1997 that would lead to a more
interventionist and less market oriented further-higher provision on the supply side. 
331
On the demand side the introduction of tuition fees and then variable fees from
2006 and the abolition of student grants were moving in the opposite direction
increasingly using market mechanism to fund HE provision.
Generally then there had been two movements of ‘high policy’. The first lasted
some five years during which there was a preparing of the way for the
reconfiguration and reclassification of the further-higher interface largely through
the transfer of funding and quality functions to boundary organisations with their
roots in the HE sector. The second followed the establishment of the LSC in 2001
and the publication of the White Paper of 2003 and was marked by a concerted
emphasis on structured collaboration.
The 2003 white paper signalled a greater degree of confidence in reinforcing the
special mission of further-higher education as a distinct form of provision.
Analytically it represents a significant point in the maturation of the further-higher
education role as a sub component of the wider HE organisational field. This is
because analytically it marked a transition in the structuration of its organisational
field during which it moved gradually to a more central component of the
governments widening participation agenda.
Yet even post 2003 change remained constant following this reaffirmation of the
role of further-higher education but there was now a strategic direction that
contrasted with the era of ‘low policy’ and bricolage that preceded this phase. A
more interventionist approach through the mechanisms of semi-compulsory
collaboration across sector divides and inter-organisational boundaries had 
332
evolved. This had in part been informed by a wider evidence base built up from an
increasing number of collaborative audits on further-higher education and growing
experience of delivering further-higher provision.
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS CRITICAL JUNCTURES IN Further-Higher education
(Reconfiguring the Further-Higher Interface)
1997 the Dearing Report
1999 Funding of all prescribed HE transferred to HEFCE
2001 Learning and Skills Act 2000.
White Paper 2003 establishes and reinforces importance of Further-Higher Education
and collaboration
Higher Education Act 2004
• variable fees introduced from 2006
• establishment of the Office for Fair Access (OFFA).
Publication of the Foster Report in 2005 and the Leitch Review in 2006.
The 2007 Further Education and Training Act and legislation to grant foundation degree
awarding powers from May 2008.
The pilot and introduction of Integrated Quality and Enhancement Review (IQER) for
quality assurance in FHE, IQER introduced from 2008
Establishment of the Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills (DIUS) in 2007.
The establishment of the Department for Children, Schools and Families (DFCSF) in
2007.
Table 11.0
Table 11.0 identifies some the more significant events that contributed to the
redrawing of the landscape of further-higher education and the maturation of its
organisational field during the phase of ‘high policy’. Overall, the cumulative effect
of these changes was that the different institutional logics of FE and HE were
blurring and hybridising although not disappearing and the interface was being
reconfigured and reclassified. However, strong sector identities and loyalties 
333
remained entrenched even with those large MEG providers who delivered the bulk
of further-higher education.
Illustrating ‘High Policy’
The analytical framework developed in this thesis has used the grid-group heuristic
as a device to track the changes in the categorisation and classification of furtherhigher
education over time and their institutionalisation and categorisation. While
the grid dimension tracked shifts in the composition of the roles, rules and systems
of classification found in further-higher education, in other words the
institutionalised ‘rules of the game’, the group dimension contextualised the
processes of boundary work and boundary maintenance mechanisms at work in
the organisational field. These were then contextualised against changes in the
organisation and regulation of further-higher education. It was considered
important to recognise that the classification and categorisation of further-higher
education as distinct elements of HE was best understood in the context of a wider
system of classification of HE that reflected its integration into a broader HE
organisational field and its structural underpinnings in a wider political economy.
The extent that further-higher education was to be considered a legitimate form of
HE provision was not always accepted by all.
This chapter illustrates the relevance of the analytical framework for understanding
the contradictions, tensions and anomalies that have emerged at the further-higher
interface during the transition to ‘high policy’. The legitimacy of further-higher
education as distinct type of provision does not lie in its mimicking traditional HE 
334
but in the acceptance that it a different form of niche provision that complements
rather than replaces traditional HE.
The policy and institutional turns that have taken place in further-higher education
over a twenty year time frame are replete with such contradiction and anomalies
and the question is how to conceptualise them. Transactions and exchanges at the
further-higher interface have been contextualised as embedded processes of
boundary work and boundary crossing. These exchanges take place at intersector
and inter-organisational interfaces that have been reconfigured at times of
significant institutional changes. These institutional and organisational changes
have been set against a historical context and a wider political economy
characterised by institutional duality and shifts in how further-higher education has
been classified. The strength of focussing upon some of the anomalies and
paradoxes in this system of classification at the boundaries of further-higher
education is that, inasmuch as they sit at the intersection between two institutional
logics and sectors, they reflect deeper structural tensions and the segmentation of
further-higher education within a wider system of provision.
The analytical framework also dissected the structural attributes of transactions
and exchanges that are embedded at the further-higher interface; analysing them
by applying the six dimension of asset specificity typically found in further-higher
education as demonstrated in chapter Six. Each dimension is understood as being
combined and recombined in different configurations but set against the context of
a wider political economy in which transactions are embedded. Then the numbers
of possible combinations of these six dimensions of asset specificity have been 
335
contextualised against the duality of the institutional environment and governance
structures that oversee further-higher education. This provides a more nuanced
analytical framework than a simple dichotomy that discriminates and demarcates
the FE and HE sectors as simply different and distinct sector arrangements. It also
allows the exploration of the process of hybridisation in more depth and recognises
the plurality of organisational forms and diversity of the organisational field as
coalitions or mixes of different modes of organising within one organisational form.
The role and functions of boundary organisations that regulated the mix and
combinations of asset specificity shifted with this transition to ‘high policy’ as did
the ‘rules of the game’. Moreover, the process of hybridisation in further-higher
education and the emergence of the hybrid organisational forms evolving there
were considered as an adaptive response to this institutional duality. This
analytical framework is illustrated below with reference to the institutional and
organisational changes taking place in further-higher education during the
transition to ‘high policy’.
Reconfiguring the Interface: ‘High Policy’
The influence of sector legacies, different terminologies and categories used to
classify further-higher education, the co-existence of dual institutional logics within
its organisational field and the process whereby policy has been institutionalisation
as practice are complex. This degree of complexity inevitably creates conflicts of
interests and perspectives. The ‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education is how
to align these multiple perspectives. Theories that have addressed the complexity 
336
and diversity of the further-higher organisational field are rare. During the transition
to ‘high policy’ the fundamental problem of how to conceptualise the divergent and
convergent institutional pressures to which further-higher education is exposed
becomes more acute.
However, in applying the theoretical insights of part Two of the thesis the research
questions that have been addressed with respect to how policy is formulated and
implemented in the sector. The existence and persistence of separate structural
arrangements for the FE and HE sectors both enables and restricts policy options.
On the one hand these institutional arrangements help reproduce existing
divisions; while on the other hand they blur them. Understanding the dynamics of
boundary work in context as explored in this theoretical case study is essential for
untangling the complexities of these exchanges.
Conceptualising these historical and terminological legacies require an analytical
framework that can accommodate shifts in terminologies and conventions and that
can move beyond the immediate historically situated categories. The
reconfiguration of the further-higher interface and the shifts in how it was classified
and categorised needs to be captured through a longitudinal framework that can
consistently track these changes. This was earlier identified as a research lacuna
in developing a theoretical understanding of the dynamics and configuration of the
further-higher interface. This chapter gives specific examples of the iteration of
context and process in further-higher education and of the boundary work taking
place. 
337
During the phase of ‘high policy’ the categorisation and classification of furtherhigher
education was subject to a number of transformations. The first
reconfiguration was associated with the transfer of responsibilities for funding all
prescribed HE irrespective of where it was delivered to the HEFCE from 1999,
although this did not include non prescribed HE which remained the responsibility
of the FEFC and after 2001 of OFSTED and the LSC.
The second was the creation of a new category of qualification with the
establishment of the foundation degree in 2001 which produced a new form of
brand name capital in the system of HE classification. This intermediary level HE
qualification or sub degree provision was to become the special mission of furtherhigher
providers.
Applying the grid-group heuristic to the institutional transitions and organisational
changes that were taking place during the phase of ‘high policy’ reveals a number
of significant movements. These include shifts in processes of categorisation and
classification of further-higher education as a category, and in terms of its
perceived legitimacy as part of a wider system of mass higher education (Scott,
2009). Broadly during ‘high policy’ there was a move from a low grid institutional
environment to a strong grid one. This did not happen evenly in both FE and HE
but was uneven, moving at different paces and with differing degrees of intensity.
The introduction of subject benchmark statements, intended learning outcomes
and programme specifications for HE provision by the QAA during ‘high policy’,
represented a shift up grid and a codification of HE provision designed to provide 
338
better information for students. These principles were first recommended by
Dearing and were meant to make the delivery of HE more transparent to students.
They also constituted boundary objects that functioned to cross the FE and HE
divide.
The boundary work taking place at the further-higher interface and between
collaborating FE and HE partners engaged in bilaterally dependent and asset
specific inter-organisational working represented a blurring of the group dimension.
The blurring of public and private distinctions that had followed incorporation during
‘low policy’ had already blurred the group dimension but post Dearing the role and
function of boundary organisations became more important as the institutional
duality of further-higher education created new tensions and pressures at the point
of delivery. The group dimension contextualises this boundary work and the
process and mechanisms for boundary crossing. The emergence of hybrid
organisational forms that could adapt flexibly to these tensions marked a blurring of
traditional organisational boundaries and organisational identities. During ‘high
policy’ the shift in group was mediated by the creation of boundary organisations
such as LLNs, the HE Academy and others and the emergence of more organised
advocacy coalitions such as the MEG, the Russell Group, coalition of modern
universities amongst others.
Therefore the grid-group heuristic is useful in clarifying a period of rapid change in
terms of the blurring of group, the emergence of new boundary organisations
mediating different modes of coordination and delivery of further-higher education
and the strengthening of grid and helps move beyond dualistic concepts. Dualities 
339
are limited in accommodating the processes and iterations of context and process
that take place during boundary work at the further-higher interface and the hybrid
nature of organising mediated by the boundary organisations that straddle the
interface.
The transactions and exchanges that are mediated through boundary
organisations and take place at the further-higher interface are embedded in
specific modes of coordination and do not exist in isolation from that context.
Thus individualistic transactions typified by the market tend to clash in
hierarchical contexts and visa versa. Egalitarian or enclaved transactions clash
with both hierarchical and market based transactions.
Transactions have to be matched to a mode of coordination as identified in the
grid-group heuristic for them to become viable ‘ways of life’ and for them to be
successfully institutionalised as practices and as part of the ecology of furtherhigher
provision.
Table 11.1 is an ideal typical representation of transactions and exchanges that
are found at the further-higher interface and the institutional arrangements and
governance structures that oversee them. Empirically they are almost always a
mix or set of accommodations as conceptualised by the grid-group matrix. Each
quadrant defines itself in contrast to the others and is underpinned by specific
institutional logic or world view and preferred modes of economic and social
coordination that either sustain or undermine these exchanges. 
340
FATALIST HIERARCHICAL
Transactions inversion of other
quadrants (passive quadrant)
Disembedded
Transactions as authority relations
Vertical ordering through hierarchy
Asymmetrical transactions
Indirect control through targets and
performance indicators
Embedded as distinct vertical role
structures
INDIVIDUALISM EGALITARIAN/ENCLAVED
Transactions as contract
Horizontal ordering (group entry or
exit is fluid)
Symmetrical transactions
Control via market mechanisms
Disembedded. Roles negotiable and
fluid
Horizontal ordering within bounded
group (e.g., communities of practice)
Symmetrical transactions
Control through reputation trust
Embedded through group closure but
symmetrical within group boundaries
 Table 11.1
For example the predominant transactional mode during ‘high policy’ was the
quasi-market which was an alliance of individualism and hierarchy. This is in reality
a mode of coordination that includes a mix of autonomy and dependence that
emerges as a consequence of the overwhelming dependence on the state for the
bulk of funding for HE provision but the legally autonomous and independent
status of providers as organisations. This coalition of hierarchy and individualism
was dominant during this phase of ‘high policy’ and became even more embedded
through the stronger strategic steer of the central state that characterised this
phase.
Consortia may exhibit elements of enclaves but are still subject to the hierarchical
ordering devices of indirect targets and performance indicators. They are nested
hierarchies in other words depending on context. Pure market mechanisms are
rarely if ever identified. However, in an ideal typical scenario they would be a 
341
private sector form of provision operating in a pure market in which entry and exit
was fluid.
The greater the extent to which transactions are embedded in strongly bounded
situations as is indicated by the strength of the group dimension then the more
difficult it is for boundaries to be crossed. Weakly bounded transactions that are
typical of the individualist market quadrant tend to erode existing configurations.
This was what arguably what was happening with the marketisation of HE. As
private sector values were introduced into further-higher education the public
sector ethos of pre incorporation provision there was a tendency for the
institutional logics that were once associated with the public sector of FE and HE to
be gradually eroded or modified.
Weak grid contexts are subject to few rules and again this is more typical of the
individualist quadrant but equally could apply to enclaved settings in which strong
boundaries defined membership and insiders and outsiders but within bounded
enclaves few rule based distinctions discriminated amongst members.
Strong grid and strong group contexts such as those found in hierarchical settings
largely determine roles and rule following according to position and status. Within
an organisation the different organisational structures and processes of FE and HE
can present problems of communication in circumstances where on partner is
more inclined to hierarchical structures than another. 
342
+
G
R
I
D
FATALISM
(Isolated atomism)
POSITION IN FIELD
Apathy and marginality
Retreatist
Ritualist
Lacking organisation
Peripheral
Risk as random
HYBRIDS
Quasi-markets
Managed
competition
Franchising
HIERARCHY
(Bureaucracy)
POSITION IN FIELD
Defined by rules
Authority/ legitimacy
Status orders in field
Centralised/ delegated
Positional v personal
Risk averse or uncertainty
avoiding
G
R
I
D
-
INDIVIDUALIST
(Competition)
POSITION IN FIELD
Contestability
Price
Entrepreneurship
Markets as a discovery
processes
Ease of entry/exit
Risk as opportunity
Consortia
Competitive
egalitarianism (via
publications)
Partnerships
ENCLAVED
EGALITARIAN
(Networks)
POSITIONAL IN FIELD
Mutuality
Community of practice
Research networks
Clan solidarity
Embedded practices
Closed entry/exit
Pool risk
GROUP - GROUP +
Table 11.2
Thus transactions and exchanges embedded at the further-higher interface are
mediated by boundary organisations and boundary objects that operate vertically
between the central state and providers. These tend to be configured through
indirectly steered mechanisms such as targets or performance indicators that
nevertheless are vertical control mechanisms implemented at a system or field
level. Horizontal transactions and exchanges between collaborating providers in
the field may take place at different functional levels with, for example, academic
staff being more likely to respond to similar subject or disciplinary interests and
management to position and function in the organisation. They might arguably 
343
perceive transaction costs differently The different roles and function of boundary
organisations and boundary objects in mediating these disjunctures in institutional
logics and worldviews at the boundaries and interfaces of further-higher education
will be explored in more depth later in the chapter.
The analytical utility of the grid-group heuristic during ‘high policy’ is that it
highlights these trajectories and trends longitudinally as well as the tensions and
paradoxes that are a consequence of the institutional duality of further-higher
education and the coexistence of different institutional logics.
The Grid-Group Heuristic and ‘High Policy’
The grid-group matrix functions as a heuristic device to contextualise and situate
the different institutional logics that are enacted at the further-higher interface.
Potential the grid-group matrix can map the shift up and down grid and group. As
the ‘rules of the game’ changed post incorporation the grid dimension shifted. As
diversity increased through structured differentiation within the organisational field
group boundaries were reconfigured or renegotiated. The actual direction of
change is an empirical question. However, the grid-group heuristic provides the
analytical means to operationalise these shifts.
For example, hierarchical organisations adopting a hierarchical mode of
organisation and coordination in further-higher education require a means of
collaborating with egalitarian organisations or individualist ones that enable a
common understanding of their different institutional logics to emerge. Their 
344
interactions mark the intersection of different perspectives, institutional logics,
worldviews understandings and practices in further-higher education and distinct
interaction patterns of economic coordination.
During ‘high policy’ there was arguably a shift away from the trend towards
marketisation on the producer side (but not the consumer) towards structured
collaboration which was a mix of hierarchy and enclaved provision. This contrasts
with the shift towards a coalition of individualism and hierarchy during the phase of
‘low policy’.
Policy documents constitute boundary objects that mediate or sit at the inter
section of the four generic modes of organisation identified by the grid-group
heuristic. They can be hierarchical or individualistic or enclaved in their properties.
Boundary organisations and boundary objects sit at the intersection of the gridgroup
quadrants.
For example further-higher education policy documents constitute boundary
objects that contribute to the social construction of a classification systems that
define further-higher education and the shifting dynamics of its interface. But they
must also translate across sector and inter-organisational boundaries.
The HEFCE (2009) document which was the last major policy document produced
by the HEFCE that was available at the time this thesis was written is effectively a
boundary object that clarified, summarised and up dated a period of rapid, fluid and
constant change since the Dearing report. 
345
‘Shifts in Asset Specificity and ‘High Policy’
The set up costs of expanding the remit of the HEFCE and QAA, to include furtherhigher
education and learning new ‘rules of the game’, represented an increase in
transaction costs with a shift to ‘high policy’. The additional burden of including
additional further-higher providers within the remit of the HEFCE and the
associated shift of responsibilities would inevitably lead to additional burdens as an
evidence base and understanding of further-higher education was built and new
links were made across sector and inter-organisational boundaries.
The alignment of institutional arrangements that mediated the institutional
environment and aligned transactions and exchanges at the further-higher
interface was steered through the institutions of the central state and their
quangos. Transaction cost economics suggests that these matches would be the
outcome of the most efficient arrangements that would reduce transaction costs
and enhance economic efficiency. Boundary organisations helped oil the flow
across interfaces and reduce transaction costs.
The analytical framework developed in part Two suggested that asset specificity
was the major dimension of further-higher inter-organisational collaboration to be
considered in effectively aligning transactional attributes to institutional
arrangements. The other dimensions were uncertainty and the frequency with
which transactions took place combined with small numbers bargaining. 
346
The uncertainty dimension was an aspect of how the institutional environment was
perceived by actors in the organisational field including regulators and providers.
The more uncertain an institutional environment then the greater the risks would be
influencing an organisation’s strategy and positioning in the field. Frequency of
interaction between further-higher provider’s relevant agencies and boundary
organisations had clearly increased and can be evidenced by a brief perusal of the
web sites of boundary organisations such as the HEFCE. Increased frequency of
interaction fits with the neo-institutionalist model of field formation. In this case, the
transition from ‘low policy’ to ‘high policy’ marked such a transition and increase in
the frequency of interaction and information load that further-higher providers were
subject to and the emergence of a common meaning system or institutional logic.
Small numbers bargaining referred to the extent a further-higher provider had one
or multiple partners. This would affect their bargaining power.
The shift from the marketisation phase of ‘low policy’ to semi-compulsory
structured collaboration during the phase of ‘high policy’ witnessed several
significant changes in the disposition of resources, assets and influence among
collaborating partners. These, however, should not be considered in isolation but
should be analysed in terms of a wider political economy. Some of these are
illustrated below with examples of how transitions in further-higher education can
be linked to the analytical framework developed earlier.
The model that was developed in part Two is applied below to the recent changes
during the shift to structured collaboration and ‘high policy’. During this phase the
combinations and shifting permutations and configurations of the various 
347
dimensions of asset specificity shifted and mutated. Unlike dualistic
conceptualisations used to discriminate between FE and HE the dynamic taking
place at the further-higher interface in terms of these transactional features of
exchanges are the result of a hybridisation of the organisational forms found at the
further-higher interface.
Six commonly used dimensions of asset specificity are outlined below and their
relevance for the transitions to ‘high policy’ as illustrated in table 11.3. The point
being made is that dualistic conceptualisations that discriminate FE from HE are
static and crude indicators of the complex relational dynamics taking place at the
further-higher interface lacking context and analytical purchase in describing rapid
and often turbulent institutional and organisational changes in further-higher
education.
Asset Specificity
Human Asset Specificity
Qualifications, staff development, ethos/pedagogic style
Site Asset Specificity
Linked to location and ease of access. Psychological and cultural
distance between Further-Higher and HE provision
Brand Name Capital
Power to validate awards. Reputation and status of brand.
Foundation degree awarding powers from 2008
Dedicated Asset Specificity
Resources invested single partnership rather than multiple
partnerships.
Physical Asset Specificity
Pre-existed set up of collaboration. Buildings or specialist
equipment or infrastructural expertise.
Temporal Asset Specificity
Transfer function of FHE as contrasted to further-higher education
as a terminal qualification. Foundation degrees can be both.
 Table 11.3 
348
Chapter Seven dealt with the conceptual basis of transaction cost economics and
outlined the relationship between asset specificity, uncertainty, frequency and
small numbers bargaining. It is not proposed to review this in detail here. Instead a
number of illustrations of these concepts and their application is given in order to
demonstrate their analytical utility in helping conceptualise the transitions taking
place during ‘high policy’.
The move to structured collaboration witnessed shifts in the disposition of asset
specificity within the organisational field and changes in the balance of power,
autonomy and dependence embedded inter-organisational relations as the field
matured. The role and function of boundary organisations in coordinating provision
and aligning the different interest and power bases of providers was now becoming
more significant.
Table 11.4 outlines some of the key shifts in legislation and institutional
arrangements that oversee the transactions and exchanges taking place at the
further-higher interface. In terms of shifts in asset specificity some of the more
significant of these included the watershed of the 2003 white paper and the
Education Act of 2004 that established a move to variable tuition fees from 2006.
This represented a shift in asset specificity.
The power to award foundation degree was established by the Further education
and Training Act of 2007 representing a potential shift in brand name capital and a
shift in power between FE and HE partners. 
349
Table 11.4 therefore outlines and tracks some of the more significant linkages
between the changing institutional environment, institutional arrangements or
governance structures, the further-higher organisational field and the micro level of
boundary work at the further-higher interface during the phase of ‘high policy’.
Institutionalising Boundary Work
It has been claimed earlier that the emergence of hybrid organisational forms in
further-higher education was an adaptive response to the structural tensions that
were created as a consequence of the institutional duality of further-higher
education. Hybridisation was a flexible response to the countervailing institutional
logics rooted in separate sector histories and experiences.
Prominent in the management of these tensions at the system and field level were
the boundary organisations that sat at the further-higher interface. The boundary
work they performed enabled the transfer of policy across sector and interorganisational
boundaries and agencies. The roles and functions of these
boundary organisations shifted dramatically during this phase of high policy in
comparison and contrast to their relatively marginal status during ‘low policy’.
Control over economic, social and cultural capital involves power relations.
Boundary work influenced the disposition of power and the deployment of assets
and resources across organisational boundaries and sector divides.
Boundary work during this phase in the development of more structured forms of
collaboration in further-higher education took on a new dynamic as the 
350
organisational field matured with boundary organisations now being given a higher
profile and clearer roles in facilitating collaboration. Inter sector collaboration was
reaffirmed as a policy priority in the government’s white paper of 2003. The white
paper arguably marked a coming of age for further-higher education as a
distinctive form of institutionalised provision (HEFCE, 2009).
It now remains to demonstrate how during the phase of ‘high policy’ boundary work
in further-higher education continued the cycles of iteration of context and process
that produced a constant flow of configuration and reconfiguration of the furtherhigher
interface. Two stages of ‘high policy’, one preceding the 2003 white paper
and one following, it marked fundamental shifts in the institutional logics of furtherhigher
education. These developments can only be understood relationally and
holistically rather than being conceptualised as static dualities that discriminate FE
and HE as separate categories of provision.
The transition to ‘high policy’ and more interventionist forms of structured
collaboration witnessed the creation of a number of new boundary organisations.
In terms of the boundary work they undertook they had more explicit roles and
functions compared to the boundary organisations of ‘low policy’. These had a
much more ambiguous role in mediating the further-higher interface. During the
period of bricolage in the phase of ‘low policy’ they were notable for their relative
silences and their focus on other priorities. The strategic planning of further-higher
education was not high on the list of these priorities. This phase of marketisation
was a turbulent and relatively unregulated one. 
351
Institutional environment (‘rules of the game’)
MACRO
Dearing Report 1997
Teaching and Higher Education Act
1998
Learning and Skills Act 2001
White paper 2003
Higher education Act 2004-variable
tuition fees introduced from 2006
Further Education and Training Act
2007 (foundation degree awarding
powers for further-higher providers from
2008).
Institutional arrangements (governance structures)
MACRO TO MESO LINKAGES
HEFCE takes over funding for all prescribed HE 1999
QAA established 1997
LSC operational from 2001
OFSTED/ALI 2001. OFFA 2004
Organisational field
MESO
Suppliers, Regulators, Customers and similar organisations
Boundary Work
(boundary organisations/boundary objects)
MESO – MICRO LINKAGES
Role and function of boundary organisations clarified
Significant boundary organisations include:
 * LLN’s
 * HE Academy
 * HEFCE; QAA; LSC
Boundary objects: Codes of practice, best practice guides
(e.g., HEFCE, 2009)
Organisational Forms-Hybrids
MICRO
* Franchising/Consortiums
* Validation/accreditation
* Direct/Indirect Funding
* Dual or binary models of further-higher provision
Table 11.4 
352
Two stages of development during the phase of ‘high policy’, one roughly between
1997 and 2003 and the other from then on until 2008, have been outlined above.
The first stage prepared the way in reconfiguring the interface firstly through the
transfer of funding of prescribed HE to the HEFCE in 1999 followed by the creation
of the LSC in 2001 and the establishment of the first foundation degrees in 2001.
During this period, a system of student loans were also introduced, and student
grants abolished. Responsibilities for quality assurance of prescribed HE were
given to the QAA established in 1997.
The second stage saw the establishment of LLNs, a new Education and Training
Act in 2004 that brought in variable fees and later the Education and Training Act
of 2007 which gave further-higher education providers the right to apply for
foundation degree awarding powers from May 2008.
The cumulative effect of these transitions was a more proactive role for boundary
organisations such as the HE Academy, the QAA and various special initiatives for
bridging the further-higher interface.
The role and functions of boundary organisations was to act as intermediaries that
spanned the different sector legacies, institutional logics, organisational and
disciplinary cultures of FE and HE. They would play an increasingly important role
during the phase of ‘high policy’ as the increasing complexity, fragmentation and
diversity of the organisational field strengthened the need to align multiple
interests, values and the different sector legacies and institutional logics. 
353
Coordinating these multiple interests, different perspectives and understandings at
a field and system level became much more important.
The boundary work taking place at the further-higher interface and across interorganisational
boundaries would therefore become a much more strategically
significant feature of further-higher education during ‘high policy’. It involved
complex issues in the management of the tensions and synergies that
collaborative working and institutional duality had generated and in dealing with the
‘wicked problem’ of further-higher education.
Boundary organisations tended to increase in importance during the phase of ‘high
policy’ as concerted attempts were made to ensure that collaboration across sector
boundaries was encouraged and incentivised. This contrasted with the phase of
‘low policy’ when the role and functions of boundary organisations were often
ambiguous and FE and HE operated separate and parallel funding, quality and
planning systems.
Boundary organisations also functioned to produce boundary objects that mediate
the further-higher interface. These could take the form of codes of practice,
circulars, cross sector consultations and staff development events or documented
instances of best practice. As intended in the original concept they needed to be
flexible enough to accommodate different organisational cultures and working
practices while stable enough to retain their own identities as mediators of
divergent organisational worlds. 
354
The era of ‘high policy’ witnessed a proliferation of boundary objects designed to
mediate inter-organisational working and boundary work in contrast to the more
limited volume circulating during the era of ‘low policy’. This fits with the neoinstitutionalist
model of how an organisational field evolves as it matures. During
the structuration of a field it would be subject to an increase in the frequency of
interaction, an increase in the information load circulating in a field and the
emergence of a common meaning system. Examples of some of the boundary
objects produced during ‘high policy’ and contrasted to the phase of ‘low policy’ are
given below.
Boundary Objects ‘LOW POLICY’ ‘HIGH POLICY’
Codes of practice No 1998/1999a, 1999b, 2000, 2010
in press
Web sites
Boundary orgs
HEFCE
HEQC
HEFCE
QAA
HE Academy
Policy docs
Consultations
Circulars
HEFCE (1995) Funding
the Relationship 1995
etc.,
e.g.,HEFCE 2006,2008,
ILO’s , subject benchmark
statements
Programme specifications
No HEQF
Consultations/Events Relatively infrequent More frequent (increased
information load). HEFCE
2006,2008
Collaborative Audits HEQC, 1995 HEFCE, 2009
Costing FHE Provision Costings unexplored HEFCE 1998, 1998a,1988b,
2000
Table 11.5
Several codes of practice were produced as guides for delivering further-higher
education alongside a number of best practice documents published by the
HEFCE and QAA. The Higher Education Academy contributed to widening
understanding of the further-higher interface through various events, through
reviews of existing grey, practitioner and policy literatures (Jones, 2006) and the 
355
establishment of an archive of materials on further-higher education based at
Norwich College.
These developments are captured through the use of an analytical framework and
conceptual vocabulary developed in part two of the thesis. One component of this
tool kit, the use of the grid-group heuristic for understanding how further-higher
education was classified and categorised and how that has changed over time, has
been identified earlier. Of specific interest for this approach is how to conceptualise
the anomalies in the system of classification and the processes whereby
boundaries are demarcated in further-higher education and the further-higher
education interface maintained. This can only be done contextually and
relationally.
This framework can be applied to understanding the use of boundary objects in
further-higher education and can be captured using the grid-group heuristic.
Boundary objects are situated at the points in the grid-group matrix at which
different modes of organising and their underpinning preferences, institutional
logics or ‘ways of life’ intersect. It is here that anomaly and dissonance is most
likely to occur and needs to be bridged in the context of collaborative working.
Accommodating these different perspectives or worldviews represented by the
quadrants of the grid-group matrix and at the further-higher interface can be
mediated through the use boundary objects as a means of translating different
‘cultural biases’ that are rooted in the different identities and sector legacies of
further-higher education. 
356
Ensuring that these mediating devices function effectively requires that a fit
between the ‘objects’ and their intrinsic properties and a specific quadrant can be
translated and understood by organisations embedded in another quadrant.
For example, hierarchical boundary objects would be imposed perhaps in the
shape of directives that would indicate that non compliance would result in financial
sanctions. A crucial issues surrounding these type of hierarchical boundary objects
would be the extent that they were perceived to be legitimate by non hierarchical
systems of organising. In neo-institutionalist terminology these would imply
coercive institutional isomorphism at work.
Enclaved or egalitarian boundary objects would be based upon consultation and
involved discussion and would normally be accepted as legitimate if there was
perceived to have been genuine consultation taking place.
Individualistic boundary objects would be usually produced for specific situations
and might not easily transfer to other contexts or settings. On the other hand they
could also be examples of practices that had emerged in the private sector that it
would be claimed could be transferred to the public sector.
Fatalist boundary objects might take the form of dark humour, subversive literature
or gossip that symbolised something else across organisational boundaries that
different members of collaborating organisations shared in common. For example,
a certain degree of cynicism about initiatives that were seen as being imposed 
357
rather than agreed might cross inter-organisational boundaries if the staff involved
felt these were being imposed without consultation.
Boundary objects are inert in themselves and their meaning only becomes
apparent in their implementation across an organisational, group or sector
boundary and in the context and use in which they are applied. Within the
organisational field they are the conduits or synapses through which information
and meaning can flow. The help bridge organisational and sector boundaries or
reinforce them.
During ‘high policy’ the number and use of boundary objects increased in volume
and quality while the role and function of boundary organisations shifted from being
marginal players at the periphery of the field to a more central role in coordinating
a much more complex and diverse system of further-higher education provision.
This chapter has illustrated the major institutional and organisational changes that
took place at the further-higher interface during the transition to the phase of ‘high
policy’. The classification and reconfiguration of further-higher interface was first
considered, then the relation and iteration of transactions and exchanges
embedded at the interface with the changing institutional environment and shifting
institutional arrangements or governance structures was unpacked and explored
against its wider political economy.
The boundary work and the role and function of boundary organisations and
boundary objects were then discussed as part of the role structure of the 
358
organisational field. Boundary configurations and role structures have to be
understood in context when trying to conceptualise the further-higher interface.
Otherwise it is difficult to make sense of and to conceptualise changes at its
boundaries.
Throughout the chapter the analytical framework developed in part Two of the
thesis has been evaluated for its analytical purchase. The analytical framework
developed there was applied to illustrate the institutional and organisational
transitions that took place at the further-higher interface. Finally it was shown that
boundary work and the role and function of boundary organisations at the furtherhigher
interface has changed significantly from the phase of ‘low policy’ to the
more interventionist phase of ‘high policy’ characterise by semi-compulsory
structured collaboration across the sector divide. 
359
CHAPTER TWELVE
CONCLUSION
This research has presented a theoretical and conceptual account of the evolution
of the English further-higher education interface. A neo-institutionalist analytical
framework was used to construct a political economy that captured the evolution of
the interface over two decades. Within that context, a socio-political analysis of the
dual institutional environment of further-higher education was theorised.
The structure and dynamics of exchanges at the interface and associated
boundary were explored contextually and in terms of their embeddedness in wider
institutional and organisational contexts. The organisational field of further-higher
education is itself embedded in this wider institutional, structural and cultural
environment. Particular attention was paid to the processes of hybridisation at the
interface and the emergence of new organisational forms.
The lack of an existing body of theory with which to situate the context, process
and dynamics of institutional and organisational change at the further-higher
interface has hitherto been a significant weakness in developing theory that can
inform policy. This research has made a contribution to filling that gap. 
360
The separate sector legacies and configurations that exist at the further-higher
interface, and the increasing structural diversification of further-higher provision in
the context of its wider higher education organisational field, were shown to be
leading to a mode of provision at the further-higher interface that exhibits
institutional contradiction.
The research investigated the processes of institutionalisation at the English
further-higher interface under conditions of institutional duality through the
application of a theoretical case study methodology. This allows a detailed
investigation of the institutional contradictions of further-higher education both as
context and process. In so doing the research drew upon a range of materials
from separate disciplinary traditions that hitherto had not been used in one
analytical framework for studying further-higher education.
This inter-disciplinary approach was adopted with the intention of generating novel
concepts and new analytical insights for understanding how the further-higher
interface has been configured and operates. In the past the fragmented nature of
research into further-higher education, and the lack of a distinct disciplinary
tradition that focused on it as an important topic, has been a block on
understanding the complexities of the workings of the further-higher interface.
The use of a theoretical case study facilitated the exploration of the internal and
external dynamics of the ‘wicked problem’ of English further-higher education in its
detailed complexity. To revisit Yin (1993) the case study method is suitable when 
361
the phenomena and context in which the case is embedded cannot be easily
separated.
A further goal of the research was to conceptualise the links between macro, meso
and micro levels of analysis. Connecting the further-higher education
organisational field to the wider social structure and its associated institutional
environment through an examination of the processes of institutionalisation of
change at the further-higher interface cannot be theorised in terms of simple
dichotomies. For example distinctions between structure and agency or FE and HE
are limited in what they can reveal about the dynamics of the further-higher
interface. They fail to capture the fluidity of the interface and the inter penetration
of context and process. For that reason a holistic and relational approach has been
adopted throughout the thesis.
The analytical linkages between the further-higher institutional environment, its
organisational field and the positioning strategies of individual further-higher
providers within the field are considered accordingly. This approach has moved
beyond dichotomies and static understandings of boundary properties and
processes. Boundary work at the further-higher interface is theorised as a
constantly evolving flow of organising and disorganising at the interface that can
only be understood processually and situationally.
The analytical framework has synthesised a number of hitherto discrete
disciplinary traditions under one model. These include: a neo-institutionalist
reading of organisational theory and of sociological institutionalism complemented 
362
by insights derived from economic sociology. The conceptual and theoretical
insights they provided were further combined with contributions from the sociology
of science and ANT. The concepts of boundary organisations and boundary
objects were also derived from these disciplines to explore boundary work in
further-higher education. Finally the policy, practitioner and academic literature on
further-higher education described in Part One of the thesis was investigated and
gaps in existing research identified.
Part One of the thesis set the scene for contextualising the significance of sector
legacies and identities on the formation and configuration of the further-higher
organisational field after 1988. The literature was reviewed, the research questions
outlined and the role of the theoretical case study methodology as the method
adopted for exploring the further-higher interface was discussed .
Part Two outlined the conceptual foundation of the neo-institutionalist analytical
framework adopted throughout the research and constructed a conceptual
vocabulary for understanding the dynamics of the further-higher interface. It
contextualised the boundary work and exchanges that take place there. It dealt
with how further-higher education was classified over time, the structural attributes
of transactions and exchanges at the further-higher interface with the boundary
work taking place there.
Part Three applied this analytical framework to the institutional and organisational
transitions that took place in further-higher education and the implementation of 
363
policy as practice. This posed the question of how a theoretical understanding of
the dynamics of the further-higher interface can inform policy.
The Research Questions
The initial research questions that have been adressed in this thesis can be
grouped into three broad areas. First are the research questions that dealt with the
dynamics of boundary work at the further-higher interface and the socio-political
institutional contexts in which boundary work takes place. The second are those
that dealt with conceptualising systems of classification and categorisation of
further-higher education over time. Lastly, there are those that explored the
structural attributes of transactions and exchanges embedded at the further-higher
interface in an institutional context. These three areas correspond with the
theoretical and conceptual framework developed in Part Two of the thesis and are
covered in depth in the individual chapters found there.
The first set of research questions explored the boundary work taking place at the
further-higher interface and highlighted the boundary work involved in the social
construction of symbolic, categorical and formal distinctions and demarcations in
further-higher education. The cross sector and inter-organisational processes that
are involved in coordinating across sector and organisational boundaries were
conceptualised through a neo-institutionalist analytical framework informed by a
sociological reading of institutional and organisational change in further-higher
education. 
364
These processes can only be understood relationally and holistically but not in
isolation. The institutionalisation of organisational practices in the further-higher
organisational field under conditions of institutional duality is the analytical
backdrop against which these processes have been contextualised.
The distinct sector identities and historical legacies that are the historical legacy of
previous demarcation of FE and HE, particularly those that existed prior to 1988,
and were then reconfigured in 1992, have left an influential legacy in contemporary
configurations of further-higher education. How these pre-existing identities and
sector divisions have influenced the configuration and classification of the
contemporary further-higher interface is central to understanding how furtherhigher
education has evolved. Boundary work has been conceptualised throughout
the research as a set of research questions that highlight the socio-political
institutional context from which further-higher education has emerged.
Classifying the further-higher education interface has inevitably been complicated
by shifts in terminology and conventions that originate in separate sectors.
However, the research questions were initially designed to track the shifts in the
coordinates and institutional logics of further-higher education (and its institutional
duality). This was achieved through the application of the grid-group heursitic. One
dimension mapped institutional shifts in the ‘rules of the game’ (the grid
dimension); the other one mapped shifts in the inter-organisational configurations
of the further-higher interface (the group dimension). They were not necessarily
isomorphic or congruent. The strength of this heuristic device is that it recognises 
365
that paradox and anomaly are an essential part of any system of classification. The
question is: how are they managed?
In principle, the grid-group heursitic could be used as a means of operationalising
institutional and organisational change based upon an analytical framework that
moves beyond simple dualities and taxonomies to allow a consideration of various
permutations and combinations of hybrid institutional and organisational forms.
This could draw on earlier work in grid-group analysis to operationalise the
concepts.
Other research questions have considered the systemic properties of the emerging
further-higher organisational field as part of the ‘wicked problem’ of widening
participation to HE under conditions of massification and marketisation while
maintaining equitable access. These research questions investigated the problem
of how the legitimacy and credibility of further-higher education as an accepted
part of a combined post-complusory university and non-university based system of
provision is negotiated. Specifically, a neo-institutional emphasis on the processes
whereby organisations seek legitimacy from their external environment was
considered.
This led to a third set of research questions that was concerned with the role of
sector and organisational boundaries as facilitators or as barriers in widening
participation. The ‘wicked problem’ of equity versus diversity issues and the
mechanisms whereby field based informal reputational and status hierarchies
replaced formal hierarchies could be explored further. The role and function of 
366
boundary organisations and boundary objects as mediators of transactions and
exchanges that take place at the interface was considered in terms of their
contribution to boundary formation.
A broad area explored within the research was the theoretical, methodological and
conceptual implications of the research questions. How can a theoretical case
study contribute to the development of a conceptual understanding of the furtherhigher
education interface? Secondly, how does policy become implemented as
actual practice? It is argued that the thesis has identified a need to build a more
robust theoretical and conceptual understanding of further-higher education that
draws together a range of inter-disciplinary insights to construct a conceptual
vocabulary and analytical framework that can further advance understanding of the
dynamics and context of the further-higher interface.
Chapter Five has dealt with those research questions that were designed to
explore the relation of non-university based further-higher-education to university
based HE and the wider political economy. It provided an overview and
introduction to the analytical framework developed throughout the rest of Part Two.
The contextual embeddedness of the once separate FE and HE institutional logics
at the further-higher interface was investigated and conceptualised as a process
of hybridisation.
The links between the wider economy and social structure and the further-higher
institutional environment, the institutional arrangements (or governance structures)
that oversee further-higher education , and the meso level of the organisational 
367
field were theorised. These were explored as organisational practice, including the
emerging hybrid structures, processes and cultures found in further-higher
education at the micro level of analysis. Chapter Five acted as a prelude to the
following chapters in Part Two
After briefly synthesising the various inter-disciplinary literatures that were drawn
upon to construct the framework Chapter Five introduced the conceptual building
blocks of the analysis.
Chapter Six considered the classification and categorisation of further-higher
education and the anomalies and paradoxes found there. The categories FE and
HE were seen to be increasingly redundant at the further-higher interface.
Anomalies such as the distinction between prescribed and non prescribed HE were
identified. The act of categorising and classiying further-higher education was
contested and the legitimation of categories was ongoing. The research questions
addressed in Chapter Six were focused on how institutionalised systems of
classsification in further-higher education could be conceptualised. In particular the
role of anomaly and paradox in the system of classification that categorised
distinctions between further-higher education and university based HE was
considered.
Further-higher education was explored as an interstitial phenemoneon and as
‘matter out of place’ in a more extensive system of classification of university
based HE. The significance of analysing further-higher education as a system of
classification is that it offers a theorical entry point for understanding the underlying 
368
structures of social relations and social organisations underpinning the interface. It
also allows an exploration of the role of contradiction and paradox in institutional
and organisational life. The institutional contradictions of further-higher education
and their transmission across macro, meso and micro levels can then be analysed.
Chapter Seven considered the structural attributes of transactions and exchanges
at the further-higher interface in a relational and holistic framework. This approach
recognised that transactions are embedded in wider configurations of social
relations and institutional contexts that are mediated through boundary work that is
political and strategic in intent. The research questions covered in Chapter Seven
dealt with the transaction costs of operating under conditions of institutional duality
and the comparative advantages and disadvantages of different organisational
forms in reducing transaction costs. The research questions adressed how the
processes of hybridisation taking place at the further-higher interface and across
inter-sector and inter-organisational boundaries could be theorised. Specifically the
adaptive responses of further-higher providers to the institutional duality of furtherhigher
education were investigated and conceptualised. It was argued that
hybridisation at the further-higher interface was an adaptive response to
institutional contradiction and the institutional duality of further-higher education.
Transaction and exchanges across sector and organisational boundaries incur
their own transaction costs. In the original transaction cost model the main criteria
for judging the effectiveness of different governance structures and organisational
forms was which are the most efficient. However, the concrete configurations of
social relations that mediated the relation between the economic were rarely 
369
considered in depth. Chapter Seven offered a modified version of the new
institutionalist economic foundations of transaction cost theory and its neo-classical
roots to incorporate a relational and holistic understanding of exchanges. It
recognised that the social, cultural and political dimensions of transactions needed
further exploration. The intended and unintended transaction costs of organising
and implementing policy can be better conceptualised if these are factored in to the
analysis.
Chapter Eight explored the boundary work that takes place at the further-higher
interface by considering the role and function of boundary organisations and the
use of boundary objects that were generated by boundary organisations as
mediums of inter-organisational and inter-sector collaboration. The effectiveness of
different types of boundary objects was considered. How boundary objects are
legitimised in organisational practice is an empirical question. Chapter Eight
explored the question of why some boundary objects are effective and others are
not theoretically.
Chapter Eight drew on contributions from the sociology of science and technology
studies and ANT to consider the utility of the concepts of boundary work, boundary
objects and boundary organisations for conceptualising the interface of furtherhigher
education and theorising inter-sector and inter-organisational collaboration.
The boundary work encounters at the further-higher interface can only be
understood contextually through an analytical framework that does not dichotomise
structure and agency. The chapter consolidates the earlier chapters offering a
holistic and relational analysis of boundary work at the further-higher interface. 
370
Part Three of the thesis applied the theoretical insights of Part Two. Chapter Nine
dealt with the impact of NPM and managerialism on further-higher education and
the blurring of the public and private divide post incorporation. Many of the issues
that created problems in further-higher education were reflected in the coexistence
of private and public institutional logics in the public sector. The chapter
investigated the ideological shifts associated with NPM and managerialsim and
posed the question of how much these wider shifts were reflected in the evolution
of further-higher education. The coexistence of different institutional logics, one
originating in the private sector and an emphasis on corporate identity and market
forces, the other in a public sector ethos have been somewhat simplified in the
debates on managerialism and NPM reform in further-higher education. Again a
model of hybridisation may be better fitted to capturing the dynamic of change.
Chapter Ten explored the phase of ‘low policy’ in the evolution of further-higher
education prior to the Dearing Report of 1997. This ad hoc and reactive era of ‘low
policy’ or no policy was very much an experiment and a laboratory for
understanding the changing roles and functions of boundary organisations and
boundary objects in mediating the further-higher interface. Chapter Ten
emphasised the changing role and function of boundary organisations and the
effectiveness of boundary objects at the further-higher interface at a time when
further-higher education was low on the policy radar.
Finally, Chapter Eleven investigated the phase of ‘high policy’, from Dearing
through to 2008. Returning to the concept of a field the chapter explores the 
371
evolution and maturation of further-higher education as a maturing organisational
field. Its main contribution has been to incorporate a conceptual understanding of
how the institutional duality of further-higher education produces convergent and
divergent institutional pressures and the role and function of hybrid organisational
forms in adapting to this duality. Secondly the changing role and function of
boundary organisations and boundary objects in facilitating cross sector
collaboration and inter-organisational partnership working was illustrated. The
effectiveness of boundary objects designed to facilitate this collaborative working
cannot be assumed in advance. The real question is what constitutes an effective
boundary object in implementing policy change.
In each of the chapters in Part Three the theoretical and conceptual insights of Part
Two and the neo-institutionalist analytical framework developed there were applied
to policy change at the further-higher interface over the twenty year period
covered. The tension between collaboration and competition that characterised the
era of ‘low policy’ was conceptualised in terms of the theoretical insights of part
Two. It was argued that theorising inter-sector and inter-organisational structures
of collaboration at the further-higher interface could benefit from a theoretical
understanding of its dynamics. Both process and context would have to be
captured in such an analysis.
Future Work

Given the ambition and scope of the thesis there remain areas of difficulty,
complexity and perplexity in the work.The relative paucity of theoretical and 
372
conceptual materials on the further-higher interface and the lack of a developed
disciplinary tradition for studying further-higher education conceptually, make the
analytical farmework developed here highly provisional. There are also potential
problems in ensuring that the different disciplinary roots of the inter-disciplinary
areas drawn upon are commensurate and consistent in their underpinning
premises.
However, the neo-institutionalist framework adopted here deals with processes
rather than causes and does not seek to confirm or refute a pre-existing hypothesis
or theory. In other words, the processes of institutionalisation whereby institutional
and organisational change becomes habitually embedded as practice is what is
being explored. This is an approach that can be applied across disciplines in order
to develop synergies and novel concepts for understanding further-higher
interface. Both the sociological institutionalism and economic sociology that are the
cornerstones of this analysis and the contributions of the sociology of technology
and science and ANT with their emphasis on boundary work start from basically
similar points. These emphasised the embeddedness of economic activity in
institutional contexts and the translation processes whereby boundaries and
sectors are crossed and coordinated. This emphasis on processes explored in
context and a relational and holistic understanding of the relationship between
them is common to the inter-disciplinary literatures used here.
Consequently, there are a number of areas in which the research could be taken
further. The embedding of policy as practice could be explored through
investigating what constitutes effective and ineffective boundary objects in further-
373
higher education. Secondly, the classification of further-higher education and the
symbolic boundary work involved in categorising further-higher education as
distinct from FE and HE could be analysed from a philosophical stance rather than
simply administrative distinctions. To date, there is little in the way of significant
debate about what further-higher education actually is or should be as a form of
post-complusory provision that moves beyond adminstrative distinctions or
conventional description. For example, there is no body of work solely
concentrating on further-higher education similar to that of Barnett’s (1990) work
on the distinctiveness and philosophical basis of higher education.
Thirdly while the impact of institutional and organisational change through the
implementation of NPM and managerialist practices has been investigated in both
sectors, this has been done separately. The impact of these trends and the
different impact of similar institutional pressures at either side of the interface could
be analysed holistically and relationally. It is unlikely that these institutional
pressures have impacted equally on FE and HE or that the responses of these two
sectors were identical. The grid-group heuristic could be operationalised to
progress this.
Furthermore in situations of institutional and organisational hybridisation in which
mixes of FE and HE are combined in one organisational form, the role of hybrid
organisational forms or ‘clumsy institutions’ in mediating conflicting pressures
originating in the institutional environment may be significant. The tensions created
as a consequence of the institutional duality of further-higher education could be
considered in detail through the application and operationalisation of a modified 
374
transaction cost analysis. The contextual embeddedness of transactions set
against their ‘degree of fit’ with their institutional environment could then be
incorporated into the analysis. Hybrid organisational forms could then be
investigated in terms of their importance in reducing the transaction costs of
operating at the interstices of two systems of regulation and oversight, one
originating in FE and the other in HE.
The emergence of informal status and reputational hierarchies following the
abolition of the binary divide could be explored further. An analysis of newspapers
and popular accounts of the emergence of further-higher education over the last
twenty years might prove illuminating for understanding the role of moral panics
and the influence of the media on public perception of further-higher education.
The extent to which further-higher education is perceived as a legitimate
component of a larger university based HE provision could then be investigated
through a triangulation of sources.
The lack of a research culture in FE was one issue that recurred throughout the
practitioner literature. Investigating initiatives to embed a research culture in
further-higher education and the relationship of scholarship to research in furtherhigher
education needs clarifying. This is as much a matter of culture changes as it
is of putting structures in place. The distinction between practitioners as
interpreters of other researchers’ knowledge and practitioners as producers of
knowledge could be explored in more depth. Provisional studies of how research
has been embedded in FECs is not promising in terms of the long-term viability of
existing practices or in terms of priorities given to research in FE. 
375
Finally, ethnographic work that explores the everyday world of practitioners in
further-higher settings could usefully add to the existing knowledge base through
an investigation of the informal and formal dimensions of boundary work at the
further-higher interface. This would be one way of accessing the impact of sector
identities and loyalties on contemporary practice at the further-higher interface at a
time of regulatory and organisational change.
The thesis has set the theoretical and conceptual model developed here for
understanding the further-higher education interface against the context of an
under-researched and some would argue under-valued aspect of mainstream HE
provision. It is a provisional attempt to highlight gaps in the ‘field’ of study and the
lack of a coherent disciplinary tradition that addresses theoretical and conceptual
facets of further-higher education provision. While arguably eclectic, it claims that
the maturity of a disciplinary field is reflected in the elegance and simplicity of its
theoretical tools. The thesis has attempted to develop a set of analytical tools and
clear away some of the conceptual undergrowth in order to begin a more
substantial theoretical explanation of the dynamics of further–higher education. 
376
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abolafia, M. (2001) Making Markets. Opportunities and Restraints on Wall
Street. London : Harvard University Press.

Abramson, M; Ellwood, S and Thompson, L. (1993) Five Years of Franchising:
an Analysis of the Profile, Performance and Progression of LINCS
Students 1985-90. Preston, University of Central Lancashire.
Abramson, M. (ed) (1994) FHE Partnerships and Quality: Towards a National
Agenda. Proceedings of the One Day National Conference held at the
University of Central Lancashire 1st March 1994. University of Central
Lancashire.

Abramson, M. Bird, J and Stennet, A. (1996) Further and Higher Education
Partnerships. The Future for Collaboration. SRHE/Open University
Press: Buckingham.
Ainley, P; Smith D; Watson J and Yeomans J. (2000) report to the ESRC on
research into Progression and Pathways in 16-25 Education and
Training
Ainley, P. (2003) Towards a Seamless Web or a New Tertiary Tripartism? The
Emerging Shape of Post-14 Education and Training in England. British
Journal of Educational Studies, Vol. 51, No. 4 (Dec., 2003), pp. 390-
407.
Alchian, A A and Demsetz, H. (1972) Production, information costs and
economic organisation. American Economic Review, Vol 2, No 5, pp
777 – 795.
Altman, Y and Baruch, Y. (1998) Cultural Theory and Organizations: Analytical
Method and Cases. Organization Studies, Vol. 19, No. 5, 769-785.
Audit Commission. (1985) Obtaining Better Value from Further Education
(London, HMSO).
Barnett, R. (1990) The Idea of a higher Education. Buckingham: The Society for
Research into Higher Education & Open University Press. 
377
Bathmaker, A M, Brooks, G, Parry, G and Smith, D. (2008) ‘Dual-sector further
and higher education: policies, organisations and students in
transition’, Research Papers in Education, 23 (2), 125-137.
Beckert, J. (2002) Beyond the Market: The Social Foundations of Economic
Efficiency. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bird, J and Crawley, G. (1994) Franchising and Other Further Education/Higher
Education Partnerships: The Student Experience and Policy, in: S.
Haselgrove (ed.) The Student Experience (Buckingham: The Open
University/SRHE).
Bocock, J and Scott, P. (1995) Redrawing the Boundaries. Further / Higher
Education Partnerships. Final Report. Centre for Policy Studies in
Education. University of Leeds.
Bourdieu, P. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bourdieu, P and Wacquant, L. (1992). An invitation to reflexive sociology.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Borys, B and Jemison, D B. (1989) Hybrid Arrangements as Strategic Alliances:
Theoretical Issues in Organizational Combinations, in The Academy of
Management Review 14:2:234-249.
Brandenburger, A M and Nalebuff B J. (1996) Co-opetition. Doubleday
Business.
Brint, S and Karabel, J. (1989) The diverted dream: community colleges and
the promise of educational opportunity in America, 1900-1985. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Brotherton, B. (1998) Developing a Culture and Infrastructure to Support
Research- Related Activity in FE Institutions: a knowledge-based
organisation perspective, Research in Post-Compulsory Education, 3,
pp. 311-328.
Brownlow, S. (1995) Managing quality assurance at the FE/HE interface.
FEDA, Bristol.
Burns, D. (2007) Conceptualising and interpreting organizational boundaries
between further and higher education in ‘dual sector’ institutions:
where are they and what do they do? Paper presented at the
International Conference on researching transitions in lifelong learning
at the University of Stirling, 22-24 June 2007. 
378
Callon, M. (1986). Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: Domestication
of the Scallops and the Fishermen of Saint Brieuc Bay. In J. Law
(Ed.) Power, Action and Belief: a new Sociology of Knowledge?
Sociological Review Monograph. London, Routledge and Kegan
Paul. 32: 196-233.
Callon, M. (ed) (1998)The Law of the Markets. London: Blackwell Publishers.
Camillus, J C. (2008) ‘Wicked Problems’. Harvard Business Review. May.
Carlile, R P. (2002). A Pragmatic View of Knowledge and Boundaries:
Boundary Objects in New Product Development. Organization
Science, Vol.13 .(4):442-455.
Clark, B C. (1960) The ’Cooling-out Function’ in Higher Education," American
Journal of Sociology, Vol. LXV, pp. 569-576.
Clark, J. (2002). Non-prescribed higher education: where does it fit? London:
Learning and Skills Development Agency.
Clarke, J and Newman, J. (1997) The Managerial State. London: Sage.
Coase, W. (1937) The Nature of the Firm. Economica, Vol 4, pp386 – 405.
Copland, G; Shandev, D and Flint, C. eds (2008). Unfinished business in
widening participation: the end of the beginning. Learning Skills
Network: Holborn.
Dake, K. (1991) Orienting Dispositions in the Perception of Risk: An Analysis of
Contemporary Worldviews and Cultural Biases. Journal of CrossCultural
Psychology 1991; 22; 61.
Dake, K and Thompson,M. (1999) Making ends meet, in the household and on
the planet. GeoJournal 47: pp 417–424.
Davis, L and North, D. (1970) Institutional Change and American Economic
Growth: A First Step Towards a Theory of Institutional Innovation. The
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 30, No. 1, The Tasks of Economic
History. pp. 131-149.
Deem, R. (1998) New managerialism in higher education – The management of
performances and cultures in university, International Studies in the
Sociology of Education, 8, pp. 47-70. 
379
Deem, R. (2001) Globalisation, New Managerialism, Academic Capitalism and
Entrepreneurialism in Universities: Is the Local Dimension Still
Important? Comparative Education, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 7-20.
Deem, R and Brehony, K. (2005) Management as Ideology: The Case of 'New
Managerialism' in Higher Education. Oxford Review of Education, Vol.
31, No. 2 (Jun., 2005), pp. 217-235.
DES. (1991 ) Higher education in further education colleges. Franchising and
other forms of collaboration with polytechnics. A report by HM
Inspectors, no 228/ 91, London, Department of Employment and
Sciemce.
DfES. (2003). The future of higher education, Cm 5735. London: Department
for Education and Skills.
DiMaggio, P and Powell, W W. (1983) The iron cage revisited: institutional
isomorphism and collective rationality in organization fields, American
Sociological Review, 48, April: 147-160.
Dougherty, K. (2001) The Contradictory College: The Conflicting Origins,
Impacts and Futures of the Community College.

Douglas, M. (1966) Purity and Danger. An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution
and Taboo. Routledge, Keegan and Paul.
Douglas, M. (1982) Essays in the Sociology of Perception. Routledge, Taylor
and Francis: London.
Douglas, M. (1970) Natural Symbols. Routledge: London.
Eisenhardt, K M. (1989) Building Theories From Case Study Research
Academy of Management. The Academy of Management Review; Oct
1989; 14, 4.
Eckstein, H. (1992) Regarding Politics: Essays on Political Theory, Stability,
and Change. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp 115 – 179.
Elliot, G. (1996) Educational Management and the Crisis of Reform in Further
Education. Journal of Vocational Education and Training, Vol 48 (1).
Elliott, G. (1996a) Why is research invisible in further education? British
Educational Research Journal, 22(1), pp. 101–111.
Fama, F E and Jensen, M C. (1983) "Separation of Ownership and Control",
Journal of Law and Economics. 26 (3) :301-26. 
380
Fama, F E and M C. Jensen (1983a), "Agency Problems and Residual Claims",
Journal of Law and Economics. 26 (3):327-49.
FEDA/FEFC. (1999) Cost of Franchising and Direct Provision. Further
Education Funding Council.
FEFC. (1998) Collaborative provision : National Survey Report Further
Education Funding Council FEFC (1999a) Franchising, fees and
related matters. Circular 99/09. Further Education Funding Council.
FEFC. (1999) Costs of franchising and direct provision : executive summary of
the report by KPMG, commissioned by the Further Education Funding
Council Further Education Funding Council.
Ferlie, E; Ashburner,L and Pettigrew, A. (1996) The New Public Management in
Action. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ferlie, E, Musselin, C and Andresani, G. (2008) The steering of higher
education systems: a public management perspective. Higher
Education. 56:325–348.
FHP. (2006-2008) FurtherHigher Project. Universal Access and Dual Regimes
of Further and Higher Education. Economic and Social Research
Council: www.sheffield.ac.uk/furtherhigher.
Field, J. (2002) Educational Studies beyond School. British Journal of
Educational Studies, Vol. 50, No. 1, pp120 – 143.
Fletcher, M. (ed) (2000) For better or worse. The influence of franchising on
learning. FEDA/FEFC (1999) Cost of Franchising and Direct
Provision. Further Education Funding Council.
Fligstein, N. (1996) Markets as Politics. A Political-Cultural Approach to
Markets. American Sociological Review. Vol 6, (4).
Foster, A. (2005) Realising the Potential. A review of the future role of further
education colleges. London: DfES.
Friedland, R and Alford, R R. (1991) Bringing Society Back in: Symbols,
Practices, and Institutional Contradictions. pp. 232-266 in The New
Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, edited by Walter W. Powell
and Paul J. DiMaggio. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Frolich, N. (2005) Implementation of New Public Management in Norwegian
Universities. European Journal of Education, Vol. 40, No. 2.
381
Garrod, N and Macfarlane, B. (2007) Scoping the Duals: Structural challenges
of combining further and higher education in post-secondary
institutions, Higher Education Quarterly, 61, 4: 578-596.
Garrod, N and Macfarlane, B. (eds.) (2009) Challenging Boundaries: Managing
Integration of Post-secondary Education. Abingdon: Routledge.
Gieryn, T F. (1983) "Boundary-work and the demarcation of science from nonscience:
strains and interests in professional ideologies of scientists,"
American Sociological Review 48: 781-795.
Gieryn, T. (1995), “Boundaries of science” in Jasanoff, Markle, GE, Petersen J
C and Pinch, T (editors), Handbook of Science and Technology
Studies (Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks CA).
Gleeson, D and Shain, F. (1999), “By appointment: governance, markets and
managerialism in further education”, British Educational Research
Journal, Vol. 25 No. 4, pp. 545-62.
Glennester, H. (1991) Quasi-Markets for Education? The Economic Journal,
Vol. 101, No. 408. pp. 1268-1276.
Gouldner, A. (1954) Wildcat Strike. Harper and Row.
Gourley, W. (1997) The Delivery of Further Education in a Higher Education
Setting: A Case Study. Unpublished MA thesis University of Sheffield.
Gourley, W. (2007). Higher-ness or Further-ness. Classifying Higher Education in
Further Education in England (HFE) at the Interface: Boundary Work,
Boundary Objects and Boundary Spanning. Unpublished working paper,
May. University of Sheffield. www.shef.ac.uk/FurtherHigher project.
Gourley, W. (2008) Wicked problems, hybrid organizations, and ‘clumsy
institutions’ at the further education and higher education interface.
Unpublished working paper, July. University of Sheffield.
www.shef.ac.uk/FurtherHigher project.
Granovetter, M. (1985) Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of
Embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology, 91 vol 3, pp 481 –
510.
Grannovetter, M. and Swedberg, R. (eds) (1992) The Sociology of Economic
Life. Westview Press. 
382
Green, A and Lucas, N. (1999) FE and Lifelong Learning: Realigning the Sector
for the Twenty-First Century University of London: Institute of
Education
Grendstad, G and Per Selle. (1995) Cultural Theory and the New
Institutionalism. Journal of Theoretical Politics. 7 (1) pp 5 -27.
Grenfell, M and James, D. (2004) Changes in the field – changing the field:
Bourdieu and the methodological practice of educational research
British Journal of Sociology of Education, 25, 4, pp 507-523.
Guston, D. (1999) Stabilizing the Boundary between US Politics and Science::
The Role of the Office of Technology Transfer as a Boundary
Organization. Social Studies of Science Vol 29, 8. pp 87-111.
Guston, D. (2001), “Boundary organisations in environmental policy and
science: an introduction”, Science, Technology and Human Values,
26(4), pp 399–408.
Hall, P A and Taylor C R. (1996) Political Science and the Three New
Institutionalisms. Political Studies, XLIV, pp 936-957.
Hamel, J. Dufour, S and Fortin, D. (1993). Case study methods. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage Publications.
Hampton, J A. (1982) Giving the Grid/Group dimensions an operational
definition in Douglas, M. (1982) Essays in the Sociology of Perception.
Routledge, Taylor and Francis: London.
Hanaggan, R; Lawton, A and Mallory, G. (2007) Responding to change: the
management of further education colleges in England. International
Journal of Public Sector Management Vol. 20 No. 6, 2007, pp. 484-
496.
Haselgrove, S. ed (1994) The Student Experience. SRHE / Open University:
Buckingham.
HEFCE. (1995) Higher Education in Further Education Colleges: Funding the
Relationship. Higher Education Council for England. Bristol.
HEFCE. (1996) Higher Education in Further Education Colleges: A Future
funding Approach. Reference M 3/96. Higher Education Funding
Council for England. Bristol.
 
383
HEFCE. (1998) Study of the relative costs of HE provision in FE colleges and
HE institutions. Report 98/57. Higher Education Council for England.
Bristol.
HEFCE. (1998a) The nature of higher and further education sub-contractual
partnerships, Report 98/ 58, Higher Education Funding Council for
England : Bristol,
HEFCE. (1998b) Funding higher education in further education colleges,
Report 98/ 59, Higher Education Funding Council for England: Bristol.

HEFCE. (1999a) Higher education in further education colleges: Guidance for
colleges on funding options. Report 99/36. Higher Education Council
for England: Bristol.

HEFCE. (1999b) Higher education in further education colleges: Code of
practice on indirectly funded partnerships. Report 99/37. Higher
Education Council for England. Bristol.

HEFCE. (1999c) Higher education in further education colleges: Code of
practice on indirectly funded partnerships. Report 99/63. Higher
Education Council for England. Bristol.
HEFCE. (2000) Higher education in further education colleges. Draft code of
practice for consortia, Report 00/02, Higher Education Funding Council
for England: Bristol.
HEFCE. (2000a) Costs of higher education provision in further education
colleges, Report 00/16, Higher Education Funding Council for England:
Bristol.
HEFCE. (2003). Review of indirect funding agreements and arrangements
between higher education institutions and further education colleges.
Higher Education Funding Council for England: Bristol.
HEFCE. (2006) Higher education in further education colleges. Consultation on
HEFCE policy. Higher Education Funding Council for England: Bristol.
HEFCE. (2009) Supporting higher education in further education colleges:
Policy, practice and prospects. Higher Education Council for England:
Bristol.
HEQC. (1993) Some aspects of higher education programmes in further
education colleges. Higher Education Quality Council, London. 
384
HEQC. (1995) Learning from Collaborative Audit. An Interim Report. Higher
Education Quality Council: London.
HEQC. (1995a) Aspects of HE/FE collaborative links in Scotland. Higher
Education Quality Council: London.
Hendry, J. (1999) Cultural Theory and Contemporary Management
Organization. Human Relations. Vol. 52, No. 5.
Heracleous, L. (2004) Boundaries in the Study of Organizations, Human
Relations Vol. 57 No. 1, pp. 95-103.
Hernes, T. (2004) Studying Composite Boundaries: A Framework for Analysis,
Human Relations. Vol. 57, No. 1, pp. 9-29.
Holloway, D G. (1998) Accounting for the Audit Commission: An Assessment of
the Contribution of the Audit Commission to Educational Change.
Educational Management Administration & Leadership (1998). Vol 26
(1), pp 49 - 56.
Hood, C. (1991), “A public management for all seasons?”. Public
Administration, Vol. 69 No. 1, pp. 3-19.
Hood, C. (1998) The art of the state. Culture, rhetoric and public management.
Clarendon Press. Oxford. NY. United States.
Huisman, J. (2007) Institutional diversity in higher education: a cross-national
and longitudinal analysis, in Higher Education Quarterly, 61, 4, 563-
577.

Jarrett Report. (1985). Report of the steering committee for efficiency studies in
universities. London: Committee for Vice Chancellors and Principals.
Jensen, M and Meckling, W. (1976), Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial
Economics, 3(4), pp. 305-360.
Jones, R. (2006) A Higher Education Ethos – A Review of Information and
Literature relating to the creation of an Ethos of Higher Education in
the Context of Further Education. Higher Education Academy.
Latour, B. 1987. Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers
through society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated learning. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press. 
385
Law, J. (ed.). (1991). A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power, Technology
and Domination. Sociological Review Monograph. London, Routledge
Le Grand, J and Bartlett, W. (eds) (1993) Quasi-Markets. Quasi-Markets and
Social Policy. Macmillan Press, Basingstoke.
Lie, J. (1996) Sociology of Markets. Annual Review of Sociology. 23.
Maesschalk, J. (2004) Public Administration Journal. Vol 82, No2 pp 465 – 489
Blackwell:Oxford.
Maesschalk, J. (2004a) Approaches to Ethics Management in the Public Sector
A Proposed Extension of the Compliance-Integrity Continuum Public
Integrity, Winter 2004–5, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 21–41.
Maesschalck, J. (2004b) A method for applying cultural theory in the study of
organizations. Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science
Research, vol 17, issues 4. pp 377 -386.
Maaesschalk, J. (2004c) Towards a public administration theory on public
sector ethics. A comparative study. Doctoraatsthesis facultiet Sociale
Wettenschappen, K. U. Leuven:Leuven.
Marginson, S. (1997). Markets in Education. Sydney: Allen and Unwin.
Marginson, S. (2006) Dynamics of national and global competition in higher
education. Higher Education (2006) 52: 1–39.
Mars, G. (1982) Cheats at Work. London: Allen and Unwin.
Massen, P and Stensaker, B. (2005) The Black Box Revisited; the Relevance
of Theory-Driven Research in the Field of Higher Education Studies.
Governing Knowledge. A Study of Continuity and Change in Higher
Education A Festschrift in Honour of Maurice Kogan. in Bleiklie I and
Henkel M (eds.), Governing Knowledge, pp 213-226. Springer
Mather, K; Worrall, l and Seifert, R. (2007) Reforming further education: the
changing labour process for college lecturers. Personnel Review Vol.
36 No. 1. pp. 109-127
Maton, K. (2005) A question of autonomy: Bourdieu’s field approach and higher
education policy. Journal of Education Policy Vol. 20, No. 6, pp. 687–
704. 
386
McTavish, D. (2003) Aspects of Public Sector Management: A Case Study of
Further Education, Ten Years from the Passage of the Further and
Higher Education Act. Educational Management Administration
Leadership. Vol 31(2) pp 175–187.
Menard, C. (2004) The Economics of Hybrid Organizations. Journal of
Institutional and Theoretical Economics. 160 (2004), 345–376
Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case Study Research in Education: A Qualitative
Approach. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Meyer, J R and Rowan, B. (1977) Institutionalized Organizations: Formal
Structure as Myth and Ceremony. The American Journal of Sociology,
Vol. 83, No. 2, (Sep., 1977), pp. 340-363.
Morris, D. (1993) The Business of Franchising. Journal of Higher and Further
Education. Vol 17, No 1, pp 57 – 67.
Musgrave, R A. (1959). The Theory of Public Finance.
Naidoo, R. (2004) Fields and institutional strategy: Bourdieu on the relationship
between higher education, inequality and society, British Journal of
Sociology of Education, 25(4), 457–471.
NCIHE. (1997) The National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education Higher
Education in the learning society. HMSO.
North, D. (1984) “Transaction Costs, Institutions, and Economic History”,
Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, no. 140.
North, D C. (1990) Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic
Performance. Cambridge University Press.
Olsen, M and Peters, M A. (2005) Neoliberalism, higher education and the
knowledge economy: from the free market to knowledge capitalism.
Journal of Education Policy Vol. 20, No. 3, pp. 313–345.
Osborne, D and Gaebler,T. (1992) Reinventing Government. New York:
Penguin.

Palmer, A. (1992) Franchised Degree Teaching - What Can Educators Learn
From Business? Journal of Further and Higher Education. Vol 16, No 3,
pp77 - 86. 
387
Parry, G. (1999) Education research and policy making in higher education: the
case of Dearing. Journal of Educational Policy, 1999, Vol. 14, N0. 3, pp
225- 241.
Parry, G. and Thompson, A. (2002) Closer by Degrees - the past, present and
future of higher education in further education colleges. LSDA, London.
Parry G; Davies, P and Williams, J. (2003a) Dimensions of Difference higher
education in the learning and skills sector. LSDA, London.
Parry, G. (2003) Mass Higher Education and the English: Wherein the
Colleges? Higher Education Quarterly, Volume 57, No. 4, pp 308–337.
Parry, G. (2005) The Higher Education Role of Further Education Colleges, In
Foster,A. Realising the Potential. A review of the future role of further
education colleges. (The Foster Review).
Parry, G Thompson, A and Blackie, P (2006) Managing Higher Education
Colleges. Continuum Books: London.
Parry, G. (2008) Higher and Further Education: The Significance of Sectors for
Expansion, Differentiation and Participation in Undergraduate
Education in England (Draft report for the Economic and Social
Research Council).
Parry, G; Bathmaker, A.M; Brooks, G and Smith, D. (2008) Combining Policy,
Organisation and Progression in Further and Higher Education,
Teaching and Learning Research Briefing number 40, www.tlrp.org.
Podolny, J. (1993) A Status-Based Model of Market Competition. The American
Journal of Sociology, Vol. 98, No. 4.
Pollitt, C. (1993) Managerialism and the Public Services. (2nd ed). Oxford Basil
 Blackwell.
Pollitt, C. (2000), “Is the emperor in his underwear? An analysis of the impacts
of public management reform”, Public Management, Vol. 2 No. 2, pp.
181-99.
Pollitt, C and Bouckaert, G. (2000) Public Management Reform. A Comparative
Analysis, Oxford/ New York: Oxford University Press.
Powell, W W and DiMaggio P J. (eds). 1991. The New Institutionalism in
Organizational Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
388
Power, M. (1997). The Audit Society. Rituals of Verification. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Pratt, J. (1997) The Polytechnic Experiment, 1965-1992. Buckingham:
SRHE/Open University Press.
QAA. (2004) Learning from higher education in further education colleges in
England, Gloucester. Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education.
QAA. (2006) Learning from higher education in further education colleges in
England 2003-05. Gloucester: Quality Assurance Agency for Higher
Education.
Randle, K and Brady, N. (1997), “Further education and the new
managerialism”, Journal of Further and Higher Education. Vol. 21 No.
2, pp. 229-39.
Randle, K. and Brady, N. (1997a), “Managerialism and professionalism in the
Cinderella service”, Journal of Vocational Education and Training, Vol.
49 No. 1, pp. 121-39.
Ranson, S. (1994) Towards the Learning Society. Cassell: London.
Rawlinson , S; Frost, D and Walsh, D. (1997) The FE/HE interface : a UK
perspective, IES Report No 316, Brighton, Institute for Employment
Studies.
Rittel, H W J and Webber M M. (1973) Dilemmas in a General Theory of
Planning. Policy Sciences 4, 155-169.
Santos, F M. and Eisenhardt K M. (2004) Organizational Boundaries and
Theories of Organization. Organization Science Vol. 16, No. 5,
September–October 2005, pp. 491–508.
Scaiffe, T. (2004) The Culture of the Now: barriers to research in FE. Paper
given to the fourth annual conference of the Yorkshire and Humberside
Learning and Skills Research Network. Friday July 2nd. 2004.
Schofield, G. (2007) HE in FE Repository Project Report Ref: No. RS6107. The
Research Centre, City College Norwich.
Scott, P. (2009) On the Margins or Moving into the Mainstream? Higher
Education in Further Education in England. Higher Education
Quarterly, Volume 63, No. 4, October 2009, pp 402-418. 
389
Scott, R W. (1995) Institutions and Organizations. Thousand Oaks. CA: Sage
Publication.
Selznick, P. (1957). Leadership in Administration. New York: Harper & Row.
Seo, M and Douglas W E. (2002) Institutional Contradictions, Praxis, and
Institutional Change: A Dialectical Perspective. The Academy of
Management Review, Vol. 27, No. 2 (Apr., 2002), pp. 222-24.
Shavit,Y Arum, R and Gamoran, A. (eds). (2007) Stratification in higher
education: a comparative study. Stanford University Press.
Slaughter, S and Leslie L L. (1997) Academic Capitalism: Politics, Policies and
the Entrepreneurial University. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Smelser, N J and Swedberg, R. 2nd ed (2005) The Handbook of Economic
Sociology. Princeton University Press.
Smithers, A. Robinson, P. eds (1999) Further Education Re-formed.
Routledge.
Smith, D and Bocock, J. (1999). "Participation and progression in mass higher
education: policy and the FHE interface". Journal of Education
Policy, 14 (3), 283-299.
Smith,D. (2008) Organisational Studies in the FurtherHigher Project Working
Paper Four. A study funded by the ESRC through its Teaching and
Learning Research Programme (RES-139-25-0245).
Spickard J V. (1989) A Guide to Mary Douglas's Three Versions of Grid/Group
Theory. Sociological Analysis, Vol. 50, No. 2, pp. 151-170.
Stake, R. (1978) The Case Study Method in Social Inquiry. Educational
Researcher, Vol. 7, No. 2 (Feb., 1978), pp. 5-8.
Stake, R. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Star, S L and Griesemer, J.R. (1989). Institutional ecology, 'translations' and
boundary objects: amateurs and professionals in Berkeley's Museum
of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39. Social Studies of Science 19(3), pp
387-420.
Stronach, I; Corbin, B; MacNamara, S; Stark, S and Warne,D. (2002) ‘Towards
an uncertain politics of professionalism: teacher and nurse identities in
flux’. Journal of Education Policy, 17:1, pp 109 — 138. 
390
Swedberg, R. (1998) Max Weber and the Idea of Economic Sociology.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Smelser, N and Swedberg. R (2005) The Handbook of Economic Sociology.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Tapper, T. & Salter, B. (2002) The politics of governance in higher education:
the case of the Research Assessment Exercises, Occasional Paper 6
(Oxford, OxCHEPS).
Tapper, T. & Salter, B. (2004) Understanding governance and policy change in
British higher education, Occasional Paper 11 (Oxford, OxCHEPS).
Tapper, T. and Palfreyman, D. (2005) Understanding Mass Higher Education.
Comparative perspectives on access. Abingdon: Routledge Falmer.
Teichler, U. (1998) "Massification: A Challenge for Institutions of Higher
Education", Tertiary Education and Management, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 17 -
27.
Teichler, U. (2008) Diversification? Trends and explanations of the shape and
size of higher education. Higher Education (2008) 56:pp 349–379.
Thompson, J D. (1967). Organizations in action. NY: McGraw-Hill.
Thompson, M; Ellis, R J and Wildavsky, A. (1990) Cultural Theory. Boulder,
Colorado: Westview.
Thompson, M. (2000) Understanding Environmental Values: A Cultural Theory
Approach. Environmental Values Seminar. Carnegie Council.
Trow, M. (1970) Reflections on the transition from mass to universal higher
education, Daedalus, 90, 1, pp 1-42.
Trow, M. (1973) Problems in the Transition from Mass to Elite Higher
Education. Berkeley: California.
Trow, M. (1974) Problems in the transition from elite to mass higher education,
in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and development Policies
for Higher Education (Paris: OECD).
Trowler, P. (1998) What managerialists Forget: higher education credit
frameworks and managerialist ideology. International Studies in
Sociology of Education. 8:1. pp 91 – 110. 
391
Trowler, P. (2001), "Captured by the discourse? The socially consitutive power
of new higher education discourse in the UK", Organization, Vol. 8
No.2, pp.183-201.
Underwood, S and Connell, P. (2000) Through the looking glass. FE colleges,
HE inspection systems, London, Further Education Development
Agency.
Van Vught, F. (1996) Isomorphism in higher education? Towards a theory of
differentiation and Diversity in higher education systems, in V. Lynn
Meek, L. Goedegebuure, O. Kivinen and R. Rinne (eds) The Mockers
and the Mocked: Comparative Perspectives on Differentiations,
Convergence and Diversity in Higher Education. (Oxford: IAU Press).
Verweij, M and Thompson, M (eds), (2006) Clumsy solutions for a complex
world: Governance, politics and plural perceptions. Palgrave
Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Walsh, K. (1995), Public Services and Market Mechanism: Competition,
Contracting and the New Public Management, Macmillan, London.
Weick K E. (1976) Educational Organizations as Loosely Coupled Systems.
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 21, No. 1 (Mar., 1976), pp. 1-19.
Wildansky, A. (1987) Choosing Preferences by Constructing Institutions: A
Cultural Theory of Preference Formation. The American Political
Science Review, Vol. 81, No. 1, pp. 4-21.
Williamson, O E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust
Implications, New York: Free Press.
Williamson, O E. (1981) The Economics of Organization: The Transaction Cost
Approach. American Journal of Sociology. Vol8, No3.
Williamson, O E. (1985). The Economic Institution of Capitalism, New York:
Free Press.
Woodrow, M. (1993) Franchising: the Quiet Revolution. Higher Education
Quarterly, 47 (3), pp. 207–220.
Yin, R. (1984). Case study research: Design and methods (1st ed). Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage Publishing.
Yin, R. (1989). Case study research: Design and methods (rev. ed). Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage Publishing. 
392
Yin, R. (1993). Applications of case study research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage
Publishing.
Yin, R. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods (2nd ed.). Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage Publishing.
Yin, R.K. (1989) Case Study Research: design and methods . Newbury Park,
CL, Sage Publications.
Yorke, M. (1993) Quality Assurance for Higher Education Franchising. Higher
Education, 26 (2).
Young, P. (2002), ‘Scholarship is the word that dare not speak its name’
Lecturers’ experiences of teaching on a higher education programme
in a further education college, Journal of Further and Higher Education,
26 (3) pp 273-286.
Young, M. (2006) Editorial - Further and higher education: a seamless or
differentiated future?, Journal of Further and Higher Education, 30 (1),
pp. 1-10. 